In time of turmoil, when earthly storms arise,
The fair sex suffers lots of hardships and woes.
Oh, blue heaven, so high and aloft above,
Who is the cause of this dreadful enterprise?
 The Ch’ang Ch’eng’s drums resonate and shake the moon,
The Kan-ch’uan Mount’s dark smokes rise and wake the clouds.
From the king’s throne, the precious sword’s handed down,
And at midnight the march edit is issued.
 The land, at peace for the last three hundred years,
Is now giving war-costumes to her warriors.
The king has envoy hastens the leaving soldiers,
The nation has sake overweighs one’s own concerns.
 With bow and arrows on their backs, they depart
While their wives and children occupy their hearts.
As flags’ shade and drums’ sounds taper in distance,
Grief goes up the pass and woe comes out of home.
 The young man belongs to a line of heroes
Who put aside brush and ink for sword and bow.
Yearning to present the king with citadels,
His stalwart sword would not spare the king’s rebels.
 His youth’s will defies death buried in horse skins,
And treats the T’ai Mount no heavier than feather.
Leaving home in the costume of warrior,
He whips to Wei Bridge while roars the autumn wind.
 Under the bridge flows the water filtered-pure,
Upon the bridge grows the grass still green and new.
I follow you with heart of extreme sorrow,
For not as useful to you as horse and boat.
 The limpid current could not clean my sad heart,
The fragrant grass but adds longing in my mind.
After telling you these words, I hold your hand,
And clinging your robe, I lean on you every step.
 My heart follows you like the watching moonlight,
Spying on your mind at the far-off T’ien san.
The sword show and parting wine left unfinished,
You rush with your spear into the den of beasts.
 You chase Lou-lan, following Chieh-Tzu’s instance,,
You went to Man-hsi to discuss Fu-bo’s scheme.,
Your attire is red as if dyed with sunglow
Your stallion is white as if stamped by snow.
 The horses’ bells then mingle with the drums’ sounds,
We meet a few minutes and we have to part.
At Ha Luong, we part and each goes one’s own way,
By the roadside, I sadly watch the flags fly.
 The vanguards already near the Willow Camp,
At Poplar Curve the horsemen behind still stay.
Escorted by your troops, you speed on the way,
Willows and poplars know my distress, do they?
 The flutes’ sounds are heard echo in the offing,
Files of flags flutter and quiver in the wind.
Your tracks already carried off by the clouds,
I still looked at the mountains in home-sorrows.
 You are going into realm of wind and rain,
I  am returning to our conjugal chamber.
Turning for one more look, our views are hindered
By veils of blue clouds and chains of green mountains.
 Towards Han-yang, you still turn to have a look,
Meanwhile I always stare across at Hsiao-hsiang.
The Hsiao-hsiang smokes separate you from Han-yang,
The Han-yang trees shut me off out of Hsiao-hsiang.
 We look back at each other and see nothing,
But the vast mulberry groves of bluish green.
Those mulberry groves are of the same color,
And your heart or my mind, which is the sadder?
 Since you go into the sandstorm of the wild,
Where are you having a rest this moonlit night?
The battle fields, the same as in the old days,
Must be very tough for those from home away.
 The icy gusts of wind crack your gloomy face,
The deep currents of stream exhaust your stallion.
You are tired of resting with drum as cushion,
Lying on the sand or sleeping on the moss.
 Now, the Hans come down and close the Pai-sheng gate,
Then, the Huns enter Ching-hai and estimate
The outline of nearby rivers and mountains,
A complex in-and-out up-and-down terrain.
 The mountain fog at dusk falls down heavily,
The water in streams and springs always run deep.
For those armored-coat soldiers, what a pity!
They cross the flow, faces saddened with homesick.
 On his throne, does the king ever understand
Who draws the disfigured visage of my man?
Imagine you who spend years wandering,
From the vast wasteland to the remote passage.
 Not only at risk among snakes and tigers,
You are also exposed to rigorous weather.
Seeing you climb high to watch the village cloud,
Whose heart will not be stirred by your nostalgie?
 Since you went southeast to clear up the way,
Who knows where you are advancing nowadays?
Those who hereto fight in the field of battle,
Disdain life like the color of vegetable.
 Thanks to forefathers’ favor you are powerful,
But how long will you endure in the hazard?
The Ch’i Mountain on which hangs the barren moon,
The Fei River where blows the wind on the graves.
 The wind keeps blow harshly at the war-deads’ soul,
The moon keeps shine brightly on the fighters’ face.
Fighters and war-deads, has anyone of you
Had your face portrayed or your soul invoked?
 Traces of warfare stamped on old streams and hills,
Those who go through them feel a somewhat pity
For the young men who fight in the batlefield
And, like Pan Ch’ao, return home their hair misty.
 Imagine you, dear, exposed to cold and heat
Holding your three-foot sword, riding your war steed,
Rushing through windy war zones in moonlit nights,
While hurl the  arrows and roar the fighting spears
 Chasing fame and glory you are so busy,
Having no time to recover from fatigue.
Thus we have no one to share our confidence,
I’ m behind the doors, you are at the horizons.
 It is my fate to be confined in residence,
But is it yours to be drift at horizons.
Wishing to be fish and water together,
We are instead divided like cloud and water.
 I never thought I would be a warrior’s wife
You never acted like those royal offspring.
Why we are hindered by mountains and rivers
So that day and night we are submerged in longing.
 As refined boys and girls in blooming teenage,
We are well matched and bound by tie of marriage.
Such a young couple as innocent as doves
Who has the heart to divide and block their love?
 When you left, orioles yet perch on willow,
Asked of your return, you said: “when cuckoos sing”
Now cuckoos have sung and orioles grown old,
And before our house swallows are again warbling.
 When you left, the prune trees were not wind-bold yet,
Asked of your return, you said: “when peach flowers.
Now peaches have with their east wind lovers fled,
Apricot and rose bloom now by the river.
 You promised to meet me at Lung-hsi mountain,
Waiting from dawn, I saw nothing of your trace,
But the dead timid leaves falling on my face,
And the hubbubs of fowl in the noon silence.
 You promised to meet me at the Han-yang bridge,
Waiting till dusk, I heard none of your tidings,
But the whip at my dress’ flap by the shy wind,
And the profuse river flowing on dusk shore.
 Your news often comes but not you in person,
Green moss has covered the faded flower’s base,
Layers of green moss bounded me in their gloss,
Where each step causes hundred of heart pathos.
 Your mail used to come but not you in person,
The thin blind filters the skewed light of the sun.
The sun goes through the blind many times a day,
Your words are not kept nine out of ten times anyway.
 Let us count from the first day of your departure,
It us three seasons that the lotus leaves spring forth.
Pity those who languish at remote borders,
Pity those who guard the mile-long Huang-hua fort.
 Everyone has his own domestic affairs.
They long for their old parents and dear women,
Their senile mother with her sparse hoary hair,
And their unfledged infants who need love and care.
 Mom often sits against the door heart stricken,
Baby always needs chewed steam rice from my mouth.
Sweet or sour, I serve your parents as their son,
Tutoring your child, I replace his daddy.
 All alone, I feed the old and teach the young,
What a burden for me in longing and grief!
I have missed you through long years of loneliness,
Watching Spring renew and Winter terminate.
 It is now three or four years we’ve been apart,
My misery is thousand times multiplied.
Wish I could be be a few inches by your side,
And pour out my sourness to your knowing heart.
 The Han hairpin I used in our nuptial night,
The Chin mirror which we together looked in,
I do not know who to ask to bring them to you,
So that you would understand my love and longing.
 The ring I’ve never tired of admiring,
The gem brooch of my naive and carefree childhood,
I do not know who to ask to bring them to you,
So that cherish the proofs of your love, you could.
 After years of back-and-forth mails between us,
None of your words have ever reached me this spring.
Seeing swallows, I think of your waited tidings,
Feeling frost, I knit and ready your woolens.
The west wind comes and blockades the swallows’ flights;
How wretched you are in the foul weather’s bites,
Braving against screens of rain and shields of snow.
The more I think the more my poor man I love.
 Mails finished and sealed, re-opened to review,
Bad fortune from cast coins, afraid to believe.
Baffled  at dusk I stand leaning on shadow,
Haggard on pillow I watch the minight moon.
 Like someone whose soul is lost and mind astray,
I got dazed and dazzled as if in a vague.
My brooch pinned and skirt worn with a timid air,
I do not care for thinner waist and tangled hair.
 With slow steps, I stroll in the still verandah,
With impatience, I raise then drop the thin blind.
Outside the blind, the crows do not bring a news,
Inside the blind, the lamp seems to know my mind.
 But lamp, even you’ve known, you could do nothing,
All alone, I must bear my heart’s sufferings.
The angst is so sore I ca not utter a word,
Poor me at night with my shade and lamp sitting!
 Cocks crow noisily saying the night fifth watch,
Willows flutter dropping their shades all around.
Hours lengthens infinitely like eons,
My sadness is as immense as large ocean.
 Grudgingly burning incense, my soul nods off,
Grudgingly looking in mirror, tears gush forth,
Trying to play the ‘Conjugal Harmony’
I fear to cause the frets and strings injury.
 If it is fit to mail my heart by the east wind,
I willpay thousand gold to send it to Mount Yen.
Though Mount Yen is inaccessibly distant,
My longing is deep like the way to heaven.
 Heaven, so far and high, can not understand,
My longing for you is endless and constant.
The mournful scenes enhance my heart’s dejection,
Branches dewed with frost and insect’s buzz in rain.
 Frost like hammer keeps whittling at the willows,
Snow like saw keeps cutting the withered boughs.
Drops of dew cover the cooing birds with dust,
Wall-insects groan and church bells from afar toll.
 From the front yard, crickets chirps the dim moonlight,
Beyond the hedge, strong winds the bananas strike.
A draught slips through and slightly the curtain stirs,
On the blind appear the moon and the flowers.
 The flowers enclose the moon that makes a print,
The moon holds the flowers that refresh themselves.
Moon and flowers flowers and moon endlessly,
Before flowers under moon how my heart aches!
 Thousand griefs of mine, uncountable they are!
I become cool for all feminine house works,
Lazy to hold the needle and loom so far,
Shy of weaving pairs of butterflies or birds.
 Visage hardly powdered, mouth scarcely opened,
From dawn to dusk, I sit leaning on the sill.
Leaning on the sill till my heart becomes ill,
Without you for whom I put powder and rouge?
 I am so anguished I do not care for a make-up,
Grieving for you at the remote frontier gate.
I am just like Lady Phoebe or Miss Weaver,
Who sob and yearn in their solitary place.
 Heavy piles of sadness become my pillow,
Full stores of distress replace my daily food,
Seeking oblivion in wine and flowers,
That instead makes the flowers drooped and wine sour.
 Striking the jade drum, it fails to make a sound,
Plucking the zither, the frets slip through fingers.
I grieve for my man who is doing his duty
Pining night and day for him miles far away.
 A mocking cuckoo sings and makes me shed tears,
The woodcutter’s drumbeats seem to burn my guts.
My countenance has been deformed frail and pale,
Just those who are parted feel such bitterness.
 My heart is clearly seen through tasted sourness,
This sourness for whom thus am I enduring?
It is for you that my tears shed in two long strings,
It is for you that I am resigned to loneliness.
 My body is not near you in your headquarter,
My tear has not luckily dried by your towel.
Only my soul is happy to be by your side,
That flies for your search at riverbanks each night.
 I am looking for you at Yang Tower’s old lane,
I am meeting you in Hsiang Town at Old Harbor.
By coincidence we come to meet each other,
In fact it is but one hour of pillow-spring dream.
 I am angry being not as lucky as dreams,
To be with you at Lung Dock or Kwan city.
How I regret when the dream comes to the end,
But love in dream, though wonderful, means nothing.
 For my heart is without a moment’s respite,
To follow you every minute of my life.
My heart is with you yet you are out of my sight,
When at times on the height I look for the wheels.
 Looking southwards to the water-covered land.
Green grass thrives and mulberries boast their verdure,
A hamlet of couples of lonely thatched huts,
And a flock of white storks by the twilit cliff.
 Looking north towards some scattered lodging inns,
Clouds float on trees against the bluish mountains,
Unreaped rice decay alongside the hill’s foot,
From a tower waft the sobbing of a flute.
 Piles of leaves are seen on the eastern mountains,
Pheasants flutter, apricots seem to complain,
Dark smoke spirals up and hides the entire sky,
A wind-blown bird stray from flock wretchedly cries.
 At West Gully water seems to steer its course,
Geese glide in the sky, waves drive a fishing boat,
Myriads of pines jostle with tufts of reeds,
People come and go flitting beyond the creek.
 Looking all around searching the horizon,
Going upstairs and downstairs times and again,
Layers of clouds succeed to prevent my vision
From recognizing the Jade Gate Pass war zone.
 How can I get the distance shrinking baton,
And have the magic scarf to see the fairy?
My heart will turn into stone eventually,
Leaving me no tears to wait for you upstairs.
 When turning to look at the willow’s color,
I would rather tell you to spurn the knight honor.
I wonder, while riding thousand miles away,
Whether your heart has the same thinking as mine.
 If your heart shares with me the same sentiment,
My heart would not dare the other way to think.
My heart, a flower turning towards the sun,
Fears that it will set due to your roaming heart.
 The sun lets the flowers wilt without pity,
Flowers fade because of the sun’s apathy.
Flowers fade and drop petals around the wall,
Where I often watch at night the flowers fall.
 The front yard’s orchid flower has been plucked off,
The beyond bank’s basil exhales its fragrance.
Neatly dressed, I stroll before the residence,
And soullessly look up at the constellations.
 The Milky Way at intervals gleams and dims,
The Strider appears then vanish at its whims.
The clouds glow now pink now pale on their caprice,
The North Star’s Dipper rotates from west to east.
 The moon often sheds its light on my pillow,
Wakened at night I watch the dew wash dry trees.
How cold I am those years long and solitary!
Hearing on the lime wall a freezing wind blows.
 Years go by and with time withers my beauty,
But still roaming in remote regions you are.
We were jointly before like shade and body,
Why are we now apart like Shang and sheng stars?
 You are galloping on the cloud-covered trail,
I am promenading in the moss-dyed house.
The spring wind, so far, has not brought back your mail,
A pity to miss those happy times of ours.
 Just recall yellow Yao and pink Wei flowers,
Who join their colors in wedlock on spring wind;
Then the love tale of Miss Maid and the Herder,
Who cross the Milky Way under the fall moon.
 Pity for the chaste wife in her empty room,
While youthful age of her time elapse in vain.
Like a shuttle days and months gallop away,
And thus human life’s springtime narrowly stays.
 Spring to fall around the year, with me sulk is,
Meeting and parting more grief than joy bring me.
With too much harassing distress in my heart,
It is hard for me to retain my spring beauty.
 Let us think of Wen-chun, a beauty in the past,
How she feared lest her hair would one day turn white;
And of handsome P’an whose face is like a bloom,
His hair turned gray in spite of his plea and cry.
 Thereon I think of my blossoming beauty,
Then regret that days and months keep on passing;
And feel sorry for my ill fate and damned youth,
Young girl to old matron, how fast I am turning!
 Here is your vague face on this moonlit tower,
There is the slight scent of our nuptial chamber.
I blame heaven for having been too cruel,
And mourn my adverse fortune as well as yours.
 Have not you seen the duck couple in the park?
They are happy together not in haste to part.
Have not you watched the sparrow pair on the wall?
They never part though their hair gets white and sparse.
 Here are the insects that head to head unite,
There are the birds that connect their wings in flight.
Willows and lotus are all vegetables,
Their flowers also join and their boughs attach.
 Thereon plant and animals all value love,
Why human beings have heart to let it be.
I swear from this destiny till time unknown,
We never part like mated birds and joint trees.
 Though our love will last for thousand destinies,
I would rather follow you this lifetime to be.
I plead you not to let your hair get hoary,
As for me I willkeep fresh and young my beauty.
 I pledge to be always the shade of your shape
Wherever you go I willbe seen by your side.
You willdo your duties for the king and the state
With devoted loyalty of a subject.
 Be unshakable, your love for our country,
Be steadfast, your people-serving energy.
Blood of Chun-yu as well as head of Jou-chih,
You willeat and drink out of hate of enemy.
 After times of brave dashing with spears and swords,
You are safe thanks to protection from heaven.
With heaven’s help, you will be victorious,
From north pass to west hills, all foes are beaten.
 Shades of flags and banners will leave the frontier,
Chants of triumph will ring in state’s cities.
Your name and fame will be engraved on Mount Yen,
You will come before the throne with your trophies.
 The silver river will cleanse your weaponry,
Beautiful music will extol your glory,
Your feats, compared to Ching’s or Huo’s, are equal,
Your name and statue will be carved in history.
 In office, you will be a high mandarin,
In retirement, you will get ample pension.
Those favors will serve well your wife and children,
I also share the glory as your woman.
 I am not as foolish as the wife of Su,
You are surely not less than that Lo-yang man.
Though you come home without the waited gold seal,
I never from the loom look down with disdain.
 For you, I will undo and fold your armor,
For you, I will clean your trace of warrior.
For you, I will present a gold cup of wine,
For you, I will make up with scent and powder.
 You will unfold, look at each tear-stained kerchief,
You will read, weigh each verse of my woe-poetry.
We will change with joyful ones the gloomy lines,
And tell each other our tales while sipping wine.
 We will together drink wine cup after cup,
We will together sing song tune after tune.
Singing side by side and drinking face to face,
Our till-old-age nuptials we will celebrate.
 To make up for sad long years of loneliness,
We will safeguard our love and enjoy the peace.
I will chant a verse to show my affection,
‘This soldier should be a kind-hearted husband.’
