When all through earth and heaven dust storms rise, 
how hard and rough, the road a woman walks!
those who rule in yonder blue above,
who is the cause and maker of this woe?
In our Great Walls drums beat and moonlight throbs.
On Mount Kan-ch’uan fires burn and clouds glow red.
The Emperor, leaning on his precious sword,
at midnight calls for war and sets the day.
The realm has known three hundred years of peace 
now soldiers don their battle dress once more.
At daybreak, heralds speed them through the mists 
the law outweighs what they may feel inside.
Full armed with bows and arrows, they fare forth,
from wives and children wrenching their numb hearts.
As banners wave and drums resound far off,
grief spreads from chamber door to mountain pass.
Born to a race of heroes, you, my love,
discard your brush and ink for tools of war.
You vow to capture citadels for the throne 
your sword will spare no foe of Heaven's sway.
A man will win a horse skin for his shroud;
his life he will drop in battle like goose down.
In war attire, you leave and cross the Wei,
cracking your whip while roars the autumn wind.
Beneath the bridge the brook flows crystal-clear.
Along the nearby path thrives grass, still young.
I see you off and sorrow 
Oh, to be your horse on land, your vessel on the stream!
The water flows, yet grief wo not wash away.
The grass smells sweet, yet hearts wo not feel assuaged.
We say goodbye, then we hold hands again 
we try to part, keep halting at each step.
My heart pursues you like the moon on high,
Through space leaps your heart, bound for Thousand Peaks.
The wine once drained, you wave the Lung-ch’uan sword
and thrust it toward the lair of those wild beasts. 
You will tread in Chieh-tzu’s steps and seize Lou-lan. 
You will reach Man-hsi, discussing old Fu-po.
Your coat is red like sunglow from the clouds;
your horse is white as if all cloaked in snow.
A jumbled din of drums and horses' bells 
we huddle face to face then have to part.
Here at this bridge we will go our separate ways 
forlorn beside the road, I watch flags fly.
Carts form the van, approaching Willow Camp.
Horsemen bring up the rear at Poplar Field.
In haste, the troops escort you on your way 
do willows and poplars know I ache inside?
Flutes pipe and send faint echoes from afar.
Flags file and stir vague shadows to and fro.
Your tracks pursue the trail of clouds on clouds 
I watch the mountain chain and mourn our home.
Your way leads you to lands of rain and wind 
mine takes me back to our old room, our bed.
We turn and look, but all has come between 
green mountains and blue clouds roll on and on.
You in Han-yang still turn your head and gaze.
Here at Hsiao-hsiang I still stare after you.
Between, the Hsiao-hsiang mists shut off Han-yang.
Between, the Han-yang trees shut off Hsiao-hsiang.
We look to find each other but cannot 
we only see those green mulberry groves.
Mulberry groves all share one shade of green 
of your own grief and mine, which hurts the more?
Since you left for the realm of wind and sand,
where are you resting on this moonlit night?
Of old and now, such as all battle grounds,
those endless wastes the elements assault.
Men's faces shrivel under raw wind blasts,
and horses' knees will buckle fording streams.
For pillows all hug saddles or clasp drums
they lie asleep on white sand or green moss.
Today Han troops pitch camp inside Pai-teng,
tomorrow Huns will watch from their Blue Sea.
A scene of streams and mountains, near and far 
they roll on and break off, they rise and fall. 
From mountain peaks, dew falls, like rain at dusk, 
And down in streams the fords still lie waist-deep. 
Pity those who  have long worn their coats of mail 
their homesick faces bear a world of gloom.
Inside brocaded curtains, does He know?
A soldier’s portrait who could paint for Him?
I think of you who  have wandered all these years,
from the Vast Desert to the Lonesome Pass.
You  have braved the wilds where snakes and tigers lurk;
you  have shivered, dwelling with chill dew and wind.
I climb up high and watch the pall of clouds 
whose heart can stay unstirred by longing pangs?
You left and traveled toward the far Southeast 
who knows where you are fighting at this hour?
All those who for so long have gone to war
have learned to treat their lives like leaves of grass.
With valiant spirit they will pay off great debts 
how many, courting peril, will die old?
The moon shines, dangling over hushed Mount Ch’i.
Wind blows on lonesome tombs along the Fei.
Winds howl and howl at ghosts of those war is killed 
on soldiers' faces shines the stalking moon.
O men, alive or dead, has anyone
portrayed your faces or invoked your souls?
The brand of war has marked old streams and hills 
a traveler, passing by, feels sore of heart.
A man must spend his prime on battlegrounds:
his hair all streaked with frost, Pan Ch'ao came home.
I think of you as you bear pains and hurts 
armed with a sword, a saddle, you rush past
the windswept shores, the moonlit woods, as arrows whiz
past horses’ heads and spears attack the walls.
A hundred dangers strew the path of fame 
you toil and struggle, never taking rest.
To whom can you confide what moves your heart?
I amhere at home, you are there at heaven's edge.
Inside this door, I live my fated life 
but were you born to roam at heaven's edge?
We hoped to join like fish and water once:
instead, we are split apart -- a stream, a cloud. 
I never thought I would be a soldier's wife,
you never aped rich playboys touring far.
why are those streams and hills dividing us
and causing us to sorrow day and night? 
Endowed with grace and charm in youthful bloom,
we formed a couple bound by ties of love.
Who has the heart to break young lovers up
and build a mountain wall between the two?
No orioles yet on willows – you set out
and promised you would come back when cuckoos sang.
Cuckoos have followed orioles grown old 
before the house some swallows chirp and peep.
Plum trees were wind-shy still when you went forth
and promised you would come back as peaches bloomed.
Peach blossoms now have fled with their east wind.
Beside the river, roses fall to shreds. 
You told me once you would meet me in Lung-hsi 
from dawn I looked for you but saw no trace. 
I choked back tears as leaves fell on my hair 
at noon the village woke to birds’ shrill cries. 
You pledged to meet me by the Han-yang Bridge 
till nightfall I awaited you in vain.
I choked back tears as winds lashed at my gown 
the evening tide was surging on the shore.
I  have sent you word but have not seen you back 
the poplar’s catkins, wilted, strew green moss.
Green moss in many patches spreads around 
I pace the courtyard, turmoil in my heart.
Your letters have come home, but you are not home 
the sun sends tilted beams through my thin blinds.
The sun keeps shining through day after day 
why have you failed nine pledges out of ten?
Let us reckon -- ever since you went away,
the lotus leaves like coins have thrice peeped forth.
Pity those who must man such distant posts,
with shelter far from home, near Mount Huang-hua.
Who has no kin or family to love?
All long for, miss old parents or young wives.
Your mother's hair is covered now with frost 
Your son who is still at suck needs tender care. 
Your mother waits, heart-weary, at the door. 
Your child in hunger cries for its chewed rice.
I feed your mother, serving as her son,
and like a father teach your child to read.
Alone, I feed the old and teach the young 
I bear all burdens, yearning for my man.
I long for you while stars will whirl away
as spring has passed by and winte is drawing near.
Let us count those years of parting – three or four. 
My heart has grown a thousand more snarled threads.
If only I could nestle by your side,
revealing all the bitterness I  have felt!
This hairpin from the Han, your wedding gift,
and that Ch’in looking glass we two looked in 
by whom could I transmit both there to you
and let you know how much I ammissing you?
The ring my finger wears I  have so admired,
the emerald comb I toyed with as a child 
by whom could I dispatch both there to you
as tender keepsakes from the one you love
For many springs news traveled back and forth 
this spring has devoid of any sign from you.
In vain I  have hoped for letters, seeing geese 
in vain I  have made a quilt at the first frost.
The western thwarts the path of geese in flight.
Alas, out there you are drenched by snow and rain.
You live with rain as screen, with snow as tent 
I think of you and feel your cold out there.
My message of brocade I seal, unseal.
I toss the coins and dread what they portend.
At dusk I stand beneath the eaves, forlorn 
the midnight moon lights pillowed hair, unkempt.
Have I a mind gone crazy, addled wits?
Dazed, I drift and wander in a void.
With shame I set my hairpin, don my skirt 
my raveled hair is awry, my waistband has loose. 
In staggering steps I pace the lonesome porch.
I often raise and drop a diaphanous shade.
Outside the shade no magpie brings glad news 
inside, perhaps, the lamp knows how I feel. 
The lamp may know, but nothing can it do,
my heart must bear its anguish all alone.
Its sorrow finds no utterance in words 
pity the shadow by the lamp’s bright flame.
Cocks crow the night’s fifth watch as dewdrops fall.
Sophoras flutter, tossing shadows down.
An hour of waiting drags and seems a year
my grief lies deep and sullen like the sea.
Incense I burn – my soul, enraptured, roams.
The mirror I look in – my tears stream forth.
I try to pluck the lute, but I so dread
to break its strings or disarray its frets.
If with the easter I could send this heart,
I would pay pure gold and send it to Mount Yen.
It grieves me that that Mount Yen cannot be reached 
in thought, I search for you through vast, vast skies.
The sky is too vast to search from end to end
my yearning love for you will never cease.
As nature mourns, a human heart knows grief 
hoarfrost soaks trees, rain mutes grasshoppers’ cries.
Frost hammers willows, wearing them away.
Rain saws plane trees, destroying withered boughs.
On high, birds chill their wings amid dense mists.
Insects on walls lament -- bells toll far off.
A cricket’s chirps, with moonbeams, strew the yard.
Outside the porch, winds blast the plantain leaves.
A sudden gust bursts through – the curtain stirs.
The moon casts shades of flowers on the blind.
In floods of moonlight smooth as silk bask flowers 
the moon enfolds and sets aglow each flower.
A play of moon and flower, of flower and moon 
watching the moon, the flower, I ache within.
How can I tell of all the pain I feel?
A woman's skills I have neglected since.
I  have shunned the sewing needle, spurned the loom 
I  have stopped embroidering orioles in pairs.
I loathe to paint my face, I hate to talk,
leaning against the window morn and eve.
Against the window, brooding, I just lean.
You are gone -- whom would my rouge and powder please? 
I groom myself no more -- grief fills my heart. 
I grieve for you, who are wandering far from home.
I amlike Ch’ang O who pines there in the moon,
the Weaver Maid who sobs by Heaven's stream?
Who would make a pillow, heaping grief on grief?
Who would cook a dinner boiling gloom with gloom?
I would allay my pain with flowers and wine,
but sorrow sours the wine and wilts the flowers.
I clap jade castanets – they give no sound.
I clasp the zither – frets fall from my hand.
I grieve for you whom duty sent away
to tread long trails with hunger in your bag.
The mocking cuckoo's song makes me shed tears.
The watchman's drumbeats tug at my heartstrings.
My lovely looks have changed, turned drawn and pale.
How bitter parting is! I know the taste.
I taste of bitterness and know my heart.
Who has given it to me, this bitter taste?
Because of you, tears flow in two long streams.
Because of you, I shiver all alone.
I am not to join you there inside your tent 
my tears are not to wet your battle cap.
I can come near you only in a dream 
at night I prowl all riverbanks for you.
I look for you on the road of Yang Tower.
I find you at the harbor of the Hsiang.
When happy chance brings us together thus,
we share an hour of love, a spring night’s dream.
I curse my lot unequal to my dream,
each time I meet you there in Lung or Han.
How I regret each dream on waking up!
All love amounts to nothing, in a dream.
My heart cannot be torn away from you 
it ever follows you, each day, each hour.
It follows you, yet nowhere are you seen,
when on a height I peer for your cart's wheels.
Southward I look, but duckweeds hide the stream.
Grass jasper blue, mulberry leaves bright green.
Some village huts that totter in the wind.
Below a twilit cliff, a flock of storks. 
Northward I look – a knot of travelers’ inns.
Clouds, flush with trees, block out the soaring hills.
Wild rice grows scattered at the ramparts’ foot.
Rain sprinkles -- in a chamber sighs a flute.
On eastern hills I see but leaves and leaves.
A pheasant flaps its wings, plum branches dance.
Thick mists like billows surge above the woods --
a wind-blown bird, astray, gives piteous cries.
Westward the river turns and twists its course.
Geese sail on high, waves steer an angler's boat.
Reed swamps lie snugly tucked among the pines --
across the stream, some man is going home.
I look around, exploring earth and sky 
I often go upstairs, come down again.
Cloud rises after cloud to halt my gaze 
where is Jade Pass, the field of men at war?
How could I get the wand and shrink the earth,
and find that magic scarf and bridge far shores?
I would turn to stone, but then I would have no tears
to weep for you, awaiting you upstairs.
When I gaze back at willows, how I wish
I would counseled you to spurn a noble's rank!
I wonder – while you are traveling your long road,
does your heart also feel what my heart feels?
If only it would feel that way, your heart!
Then I would not let my mind pursue wild thoughts.
My heart turns toward the sun just like the flower 
as your heart roams, I dread the sun will set.
The sun has spurned his flower and let her wilt.
The flower has wilted, as the sun wo not shine.
Wilted, she drops her petals by the wall 
I  have often watched them drop on dew-cold nights.
The garden's orchids have been plucked off 
now duckweeds near the bank are breathing scent.
Clad in my robe, I stroll before the house,
my languid gaze on heaven’s glorious vault.
The Silver River gleams and dims by fits.
The Strider will appear and disappear.
The clouds now glow quite bright, now turn quite pale.
The Dipper's handle shifts from east to west. 
My looks and charms keep fading year by year, 
and still my man keeps wandering far away.
We were a body and its shadow once 
now we stand worlds apart like Shen and Shang.
Your horse is galloping on cloud-wrapped trails 
my slippers shuffle on moss-covered paths.
Day after day the spring wind’s brought no news 
how many happy seasons we have missed!
They come to mind, those flowers of Yao and Wei,
wedding their gold and crimson on spring winds.
And lo, the Herdboy and his Weaver Maid 
who cross the Stream beneath the autumn moon. 
I mourn the wife inside an empty room
who lets her finest seasons go to waste.
The days and months like shuttles hurtle by,
and youth is springtide ebbing in a flash.
In spring I brood, in fall I seethe with rage --
I  have known more grief of parting than shared joy.
Anger and grief entangle all their threads --
how can a reed, a willow stop spring’s flight?
There was Wen-chun, a beauty in the past:
afraid that age would gray her head, she grieved.
And there was P'an whose face shone like a flower:
as he feared frost would mar his hair, he wept.
I mourn my looks, a flower in full bloom,
and mourn fleet time, which slides and slips away.
I mourn a thankless fate, mourn blossom years --
a fresh young maiden turns a matron soon.
Upon this moonlit tower I see your face.
Inside that flower-decked room scents waft about.
On Heaven I must blame our life gone wrong --
I grieve and grieve for you, for my own self.
Have not you seen those mandarin ducks afield?
They go in pairs as mates and wo not soon split.
Have not you watched those swallows on a roof?
United, they ca not part till hoary age.
Two ch'iung-ch'iung beasts stay close, head touching head.
Two chien-chien birds fly jointly, wing to wing.
The willow and the lotus are mere plants,
yet each boasts wedded leaves and coupled flowers. 
That is how in nature ties of love will bind 
why keep two humans severed, here and there?
May we in future lives become two birds
that join their wings, two trees that twine their boughs!
No doubt, a thousand lifetimes love shall last,
but life together here and now is best.
To silver may age never turn your hair!
And may I ever keep the looks of youth!
Oh, let me be your shadow, follow you!
Where you are to go you will find me by your side.
I wish you will remain out in the sun
as you perform the duties of a man.
Serve well your country with a true-red heart.
Defend your people with an iron will.
The Chun-yu’s blood and Jou-chih heads will sate
your thirst and hunger, as your drink and meat.
Time after time you rush at swords and spears,
but Heaven will protect a loyal man.
You will win all battles, and from our north pass
to our west hills all arms will be laid down.
Banners and flags will leave the border posts 
bound for the city, men will sing of triumph.
Mount Yen will bear your name in stone-writ odes.
Your trophies you will offer to the throne.
You will wash your weapons in the Silver Stream.
They will make music and intone your praise.
In merit you will compare with Ch'in and Huo 
your fame will grace Mist Tower, Unicorn Hall.
A state grandee, you will shine in sash and cap 
on monuments, public joy will be engraved.
Your son will share in bounty from above 
with you, your wife will bask in Heaven's grace.
I am not a foolish woman like Su's wife,
and you are as clever as those Lo-yang men.
When you come home and bear that seal of gold,
will I stay at the loom and show disdain?
I will take from you the soldier's coat of mail.
I will shake from you the wanderer's dust and dew.
For you I will fill a golden cup with wine;
for you I will wear enchanting scent and powder. 
You will view my tear-stained kerchiefs one by one.
You will read my song of grief line after line.
We will substitute gay lines for doleful lines 
while sipping wine, we will tell each other all.
We will slowly fill and drain cup after cup;
we will softly sing one stanza, then the next.
We will hum linked verse and face to face we will drink,
staying together till a ripe old age.
This parting grief -- we will make up for it all:
we will have and hold each other, blessing peace.
I sing and with my love send you this wish: 
thus may you act and live, a gallant man!
