
Autumn Landscape
Drop by drop rain slaps the banana leaves
Praise whoever sketched this desolate scene:
The lush, dark canopies of the gnarled trees
The long river, sliding smooth and white
I lift my wine flask, drunk with rivers and hills
My backpack, breathing moonlight, sags with poems.
Look, and love everyone.
Whoever sees this landscape is stunned.

Confession 
Her lonely boat fated to float aimlessly
Midstream, weary with sadness, drifting.
Her hold overflowing with duty and feeling,
Bow rocked by storms, adrift and wandering.
She rows on, not caring who tries to dock,
Sails on, not caring who tries the rapids.
Whoever comes on board is pleased
As she plucks her guitar, sad and drifting.


Day Sleeping Girl
Summer breeze is sporadically blowing,
Lying down the young girl slides into sleeping.
Her bamboo comb loosely attached to her hair,
Her pink bra below her waist dropped down fair.
On these two Elysian mounds, the nectar is still remaining,
In that one Fairy rivulet, the current seems to stop flowing.
At such a view, the gentleman hesitated,
Odd to leave, yet inconvenient if he stayed.

Floating Sweet Dumpling
My body is powdery white and round
I sink and bob like a mountain in a pond
The hand that kneads me is hard and rough
You can not destroy my true red heart

Lamenting Widow
A woman wails, boo hoo, mourning her man
Shut up, shame on you, do not cry to the hills!
O little sister, I should have warned you
Do not eat the meat, if it makes you cough blood!


On Sharing a Husband

Screw the fate that makes you share a man.
One cuddles under cotton blankets; the other’s cold.
Every now and then, well, maybe or maybe not.
Once or twice a month, oh, it’s like nothing.
You try to stick to it like a fly on rice
But the rice is rotten.  You slave like the maid,
But without pay.  If I had known how it would go
I think I would have lived alone.

Snail
Mother and father gave birth to a snail
Night and day I crawl in smelly weeds
Dear prince, if you love me, unfasten my door
Stop, do not poke your finger up my tail!

Spring-Watching Pavillion
A gentle spring evening arrives
Airily, unclouded by worldly dust.
Three times the bell tolls echoes like a wave
We see heaven upside-down in sad puddles.
Love’s vast sea cannot be emptied.
And springs of grace flow easily everywhere.
Where is nirvana?
Nirvana is here, nine times out of ten.

Swinging
Praise whoever raised these poles
For some to swing while others watch.
A boy pumps, then arcs his back.
The shapely girl shoves up her hips.
Four pink trousers flapping hard,
Two pairs of legs stretched side by side.
Spring games. Who has not known them?
Swingposts removed, the holes lie empty.

The Fan
Are you seventeen or eighteen?
Let me cherish you by all means.
Thin or thick you display a triangle, and
Large or small I hold you with one hand.
The more it is hot the fresher you will submit,
Not enough love at night, daytime will make it.
Your cheeks are rose pink and give you grace,
Lords and kings love you because of your face.

The Jackfruit
I am like a jackfruit on the tree.
The skin rough, the pulp thick, yes,
To taste you must plug me quick, while fresh
But oh, I warn you against touching –
The rich juice will gush and stain your hands

The Temple of Fragrance
Who could have fashioned this marvel?
The mountain cracks into a wide, hollow cave.
Pious Buddhists struggle to set foot inside,
Others gaze at it tirelessly.
Drippings form a sweet streamlet,
As sailors on incoming junks bend their heads.
City folk also flock to these springs and woods.
Clever, indeed, the Old Man in Heaven!

Three-Mountain Pass
A cliff face. Another. And still a third.
Who was so skilled to carve this craggy scene:
The cavern’s red door, the ridge’s narrow cleft,
The black knoll bearded with little mosses?
A twisting pine bough plunges in the wind,
Showering a willow’s leaves with glistering drops.
Gentlement, lords, who could refuse, though weary
and shaky in his knees, to mount once more?

Couple of Students who were teasing her
Where are you wandering to, little fools
Come, big sister will teach you how to write verse
Ichy little wasps sucking rotting flowers
Horny baby lambkins butting gaps in the fence

Viewing Cac-Co Cavern
Heaven and earth brought forth this rocky mass
Its face cut by deep crevasse
Crack’s dark mouth shagged with moss
Pines rocking in wind rush
Here sweet water spatters down
And the path into the cleft is dark.
Praise whoever sculpted stone
Then left it bare for all to see


















