In one hundred years, the limit of human life,
Without mercy, talent and destiny clash and fight.
The blue sea was now thundering where mulberry field used to be;
Our hearts suffer painfully from the vicissitudes we see.
A gift was always received to the detriment of one’s destiny;
With jealousy, Blue Heaven often hounds the fate of beauties.
Fragrant manuscripts thumbed under the lamp slowly
Reveal an ancient love story as recorded in history.
Under the reign of Gia Tinh Emperor of the Ming Dynasty
The frontiers were calm and both capitals were secured firmly.
There lived then a small bourgeois of the Vuong family,
Whose wealth was classified as average in the vicinity.
A son named Vuong Quan, the last born child,
Was supposed to continue the family’s scholarly line.
Born before him were two girls of exceptional beauty and mind.
Thuy Kieu was the elder and Thuy Van came after her.
They were elegantly slender and their spirits had snow candor.
Each had her own charm but both were enchanting stunners.
Van commanded an uncommon dignity,
Her harmonious face with delicate bold eyebrows radiated generosity.
Her decency was enhanced by her voice of jade and her smile of flower,
Snow yielded to her complexion and clouds to her hair splendor.
Kieu’s charm turned out to be more sapid and exquisite.
She definitely was the better in both beauty and spirit.
Her bewitching eyes were autumnal water limpid, and her eyebrows were gracious lines of mounts in Spring.
Flowers were jealous of her beauty so captivating, and willows envied her hair so rich cascading.
She could collapse citadel and empire by just a smile
Her beauty and talents left ordinary girls miles behind.
Her superior intelligence was definitely Heaven’s blessing.
She mastered rapidly poetry, painting, and singing,
[And was well versed in the five- tone musical composing]
And her virtuosity at the “Ho” guitar was second to none.
She wrote a song, 
“The Cruel Fate,” a masterpiece of her own.
One of the best persons in red pants, sophisticated and noble,
The nubile age of young ladies, she approached.
Behind nice drapes and curtains, the sisters enjoyed virginal peace,
Paying no heed to those bees and butterflies at the wall in the East.
Spring was here with swallows throwing shuttles in the sky;
Out of ninety Spring days, sixty had gone by.
Young grass spread its green carpet to the horizon,
Gleaming on pear branches were pretty little white blossoms.
The “Green and Light” period in the third lunar month was beginning,
The festival was treading on the green and the ritual tomb cleaning.
Like excited orioles and swallows, people from far and near were coming;
The sisters and their brother dressed well to go out and enjoy the spring,
A multitude of fine young men and beautiful ladies gathering.
Wave after wave of carts and horses, zilions of fine apparels rustling.
In the rolling prairies, people crowded tumuli and mounds.
Paper gold bullions bestrewed the ground, and ashes from burned printed coins were flying about.
The sun was declining to the West, and
The siblings were on their way home, hand in hand.
They trod their way along a waterway, leisurely;
Before their eyes, the scenery unfolded a picture, lovely.
The watercourse, through the prairies, was winding gracefully.
Below a small cascade, a culvert spanned the stream picturesquely.
On the roadside, a small eroded mound of earth was seen,
Among the grass, half-yellow, half-green.
Lieu asked, “On this day of Green and Light,
Why do incense and smoke become here so sorrowfully shy?
Vuong Quan then explained by telling the story:
“The grave of Dam Tien, a female vocalist, this is.
Once very famous for both her talent and beauty,
She found at her doors orioles and swallows pressing noisily.
Why do incense and smoke become here so sorrowfully shy?
Vuong Quan then explained by telling the story:
“The grave of Dam Tien, a female vocalist, this is.
Once very famous for both her talent and beauty,
She found at her doors orioles and swallows pressing noisily
But fragile was the fate reserved for the peachy-cheeked sex
And in the time of her spring, that fragrant flower did break.
Living in a faraway region, one of her admirers
Made a long trip, hoping to see her.
Unfortunately, the love boat arrived at its destination.
To find nothing but a broken hairpin, a fallen vase, and desolation.
In the empty room prevailed an uncomfortable silence, very icy.
Outside, wheel tracks were covered by thin green moss already.
All his sorrows, crying and lamenting could not express.
“Apparently, there exists between us no predestined affinity,” he said.
“A conjugal union in this existence is, of course, irrelevant,
But I wish to do something for our affinity in our next existence."
He bought a catalpa coffin, rented a funeral hearse with beads,
Then buried her, leaving the grave to wild flowers and weeds.
Since then, the sun and the moon had set so many times,
The grave was abandoned and nobody for a visit cared to come by.”
With a sense of compassion from her heart derived,
She shed abundant tears upon hearing the touching story.
“How painful women’s fate is!” Said she,
And that unhappy destiny, to each and every one of them applies!
O, Creator! You were so cruel! May I ask why?
Rosy cheeks fade with time and spring days rapidly go by.
Living, she played the role of every man’s wife,
Dead, she became a female ghost with no husband in sight!
Where were those who her voluptuousness did share?
And where were those who adored her peachy cheeks and rich hair?
Since for her, even in thought, no one cares,
A few incense sticks on her grave, I am now lighting.
To pay her homage in this on-the-road meeting,
With the hope that she will know in the world of Yellow Spring."
She made the incantation , first in a murmur, then in a whine,
Then squatted down before the grave and kowtowed several times.
The setting sun was now darting its yellowish rays on the wilted grass,
And the spring zephyr was caressing the reeds’ heads.
From her hair, she took a pin that shined,
And engraved on the bark of a tree a quatrain with three rhymes.
Plunged in a profound trance, she became more and more thoughtless;
More and more uncertain of her attitude, she stood there motionless.
The color of her flowery cheeks became less lively
In her fits of sobbing, she shed tears profusely,
Van said, “You make a fool of yourself, really!
And to weep for people of yore, you have extra tears certainly!”
Kieu replied, “During the past millennium, none of the beauties,
Was spared by the cruel destiny!
Thinking of her unfortunate fate, I do suffer,
There she lies! What will happen to me? I wonder.”
Quan said. “Nothing but nonsense, your discourse seems to be!
Each of your words reflects on yourself absurdly!
The atmosphere here, with funeral fluids was quite heavy;
The sun was about to set and we still have a long walk home, you see!"
Kieu said, “For talented persons, when they die,
Their bodies decompose but their souls enjoy eternal life.
Two sentimental hearts appeal to each other,
In some visible form, will be appearing to me, the spirit of hers.”
She barely finished her last word, and preceding all answers.
From nowhere rose a strong wind twister,
Shaking up trees and stripping young leaves noisily.
A subtle perfume, the wind seemed to carry.
The sisters and their brother, looking in the wind’s direction,
Saw on the green moss footprints stamped to perfection.
They looked aghast, out of their wits because of apprehension.
Kieu said, “Because of affinity,
we were destined to encounter each other,
In spite of the separation between darkness and light, as true sisters.”
In appreciation of that appearance,
Some more verses she improvised.
Poetic inspiration overflowed her excited mind,
And again, she engraved on the tree bark another classic poem.
While still hesitating between staying and going,
They heard the sounds of horse bells approaching.
And saw a young scholar, on horse riding,
With slackened rein, along the road, the horse was mincing.
Behind the horse a couple of young boys were following,
Carrying bags half full of “wind and moon” poems.
With its snow-white coat, the horse was the animal beauty totem.
The rider wore a tunic green in color with an azure tinge.
As soon as he recognized from afar the three siblings,
He dismounted and came near to pay his greetings.
His embroidered shoes were trampling the green grass,
And the whole area was illuminated by his handsomeness.
Young Vuong, who knew him, stepped out to say hello.
Shy, the two beauties hid behind flowers as in a show.
Living in the area, he was no stranger to the party
His name was Trong and he was the noble scion of the Kim family.
From his family, he inherited both talent and wealth.
Young Vuong, who knew him, stepped out to say hello.
Shy, the two beauties hid behind flowers as in a show.
Living in the area, he was no stranger to the party
His name was Trong and he was the noble scion of the Kim family.
From his family, he inherited both talent and wealth.
Having heard of the renown of that famous area,
He knew that the two beauties lived in their secluded villa,
But mounts and rivers separated him from the girls’ chamber of embroidery.
His secret love had been torturing him and making him sigh in secrecy.
How happy he was with this unexpected encounter!
The Festival made it possible for him to meet with the desired flower.
The silhouettes in pinks, from afar, caught his eyes already:
Both spring orchid and fall chrysanthemum were charming beauties.
Renowned in beauty was the girl; famous in talent, the man.
Although they kept a reserved countenance outside, they were both overcome with infatuation inside.
Now awake, now in reveries, they were both troubled deliciously.
Leaving was so difficult but lingering was not right.
Their parting became more poignant with the evening sight
The man had mounted, but still furtively following him were the girl’s eyes.
In the stream, crystal clear water was flowing by,
Near the bridge, a willow tree was undulating its hair in the sunset light.
When Kieu arrived home and got inside the floral curtains,
Gongs were tolling the end of the day, and the sun was behind the mountains
The crescent moon took an oblique look at her window,
Poured gold spangles on the water and on the yard, cast tree shadows.
A camellia was pointing its branch Eastward
While dew-heavy spring branches were swaying downward.
All alone, she contemplated the silver moon disk,
Recent emotions and reminiscences in turn bothered her wits.
“Such a pitiful end to a human being was really not right.
A life devoted to human vanities was undoubtedly a lost life.
Why did I have an encounter with a man so bright?
Between us, was there any conjugal affinity predetermined by God in the sky?”
Hundreds of thoughts entangled in her mind
Were marvelously condensed into lyric lines with rimes
The oblique moonlight was now infiltrating the blinds,
Leaning against the balustrade, she was snoozing by.
Suddenly she saw a petite beauty, young in age,
Maiden in appearance and charming in gait.
Impregnated with dew was the face, and molded in snow, the body.
Now near, now far off, her little feet skimmed over the floor lightly.
Kieu greeted her warmly, then bombarded her with inquiries,
“I wonder what has bought you here from your world of fairies?”
The visitor replied, “We have been bound together by affinity.
We just met during the day but you seem to forget already.
My cold humble home was in the meadows, near
A bridge that spans a stream West of here.
You feel for me with a heart of gold that I do not find in other persons at all.
How wonderful your poems are! They were showers of pearl and gold!
Upon order, I presented the to the Association Chief to read;
She said that your name appeared on the “Rent Entrails Girls” list.
That, alas! was your karma, the fruit of your acts in previous life.
Passengers onboard the same boat, members of the same society, we were certainly no strangers to each other, you and I.
Look! these were the ten new themes for poems I just received;
May I ask you to use your poetic talent to write divine poems on these?”
Deferring to the request, Kieu began composing.
With a fairy hand, she wrote ten requested poems at one stretch.
Reading the verses, the visitor could not conceal her admiration and said,
“Exquisite as embroidery, iridescent as brocade, your poems were really
Should they appear on the “Rent Entrails” poem book, you would see
You would win the first prize definitely.”
When, on the floral floor, the visitor turned her steps towards the door,
Kieu tried to hold her back for confidence and more.
Suddenly, under a gust of wind, the blinds flapped noisily.
She awoke and realized that it had been a dream only.
She looked and looked but the visitor was nowhere to be found.
Only a faint perfume still lingering, but of her, no sound.
Alone, she was plunged in meditation in the solitude of midnight.
Thinking of the long way to go, she was stricken with fright.
”Flower at the mercy of the waves, duckweed drifting,
That’s what fate has in store for me, darling! to resign to my karma and my destiny, I am willing.”
Wave after wave of thoughts assailed her mind.
Each thought lacerated her heart painfully and made her cry.
From behind the embroidered curtain, Kieu’s pathetic cries.
Roused from sleep her mother, who came and asked the reason why,
“You are still tossing about in bed at this late hour of the night!
A tender pear blossom soaked in rain, your face looks like!”
Kieu answered, “I am a poor little innocent child;
But this double debt of gratitude, I have done nothing to pay!
I have visited Dam Tien’s tomb during the day.
Just now, in a dream she appeared to me
And told me that on the list of “Rent Entrails Girls” I was supposed to be.
Here were the poems I have composed on the ten themes given to me
The dream bears a prophetic message
That I am destined to a sad, disastrous fate!”
The mother reasoned her, “You should not believe in dreams.
For no reason, you just buy grief and worries, so it seems.”
Kieu appeared to be persuaded by those words so caring,
But she still was overcome by grief and worries, and her tears again started running.
Outside the window the golden oriole started chirping,
From the wall corner, willow petals to the neighbor’s house were flying.
At the eaves, the declining moon took an oblique last look.
Her heart, secret thoughts tormented; and her mind, they shook.
Lovers have in their own idiosyncrasies, it was said.
No one can undo their entangled love threads!
Since the time he was back in his study,
A painful feeling of missing her bothered him constantly.
The harder he tried to drain the sadness away, the worse it seemed to be.
Each longing day seemed as long as three full years to him.
Heavy clouds wrapped up the beauty’s abode, it seemed.
Kieu, behind the flowers, constantly appeared to him in dreams at night.
The moon crescent grew thinner; oil in the lamp dried up many times.
He dreamed of her charming face, and secret love made him suffer terribly.
In his study, the atmosphere became chilly.
Stiffened was the rabbit hair of the writing brush of our scholar, and slackened became the strings of his guitar.,
The silk blinds palpitated in the fresh breeze coming from afar;
Incense sharpened his missing her; tea only intensified his secret love.
He said, “If between us, there exists no predestined conjugal affinity.
Why do I have to suffer from that encounter with the breathtaking beauty?
Thinking melancholically of the person he loved, of the scenery
And of the place of that marvelous encounter, out he went hurriedly.
The grass was still there with its deep green;
Besides limpid water sleeping in the stream, nothing was seen.
The evening breeze fanned up his profound sadness;
With a mocking air, reeds were swinging their heads.
Pushed by his love, nurtured more by imagination than reminiscence,
He directed his decided steps towards the beauty’s residence.
Austere and mystic were the closed gate and the walls so high.
The spring that carried red leaves was completely dry, and into the beauty’s chamber, the azure bird could not fly.
A willow was drooping its undulating stores in the breeze sadly
And on a branch, an oriole was babbling mockingly.
Gate and doors on surrounding walls were closed and bolted securely.
Strewn with spent flowers was the ground, but the girl of his dream was nowhere to be found!
In a pensive mood, for several hours he was lingering;
Then he walked around the house and found behind it a building.
It turned out to be a traveling merchant’s dwelling,
Now empty, the landlord being retained in a faraway place.
He asked to rent the house, as a student out of state.
With his guitar bag and books, he moved in, losing no time.
The landscaping , with a rock garden, was very pleasing to the eyes;
The terrace had a sign: Lam Thuy- with gold letters not yet tarnished.
The good omen of the sign made him feel secretly very pleased indeed.
It meant there should be, between them, a predestined conjugal affinity.
Through his paper-garnished window left ajar,
Day after day, he was espying the East wall constantly from afar.
Just a span away, but the world of fairies to him was barred!
No silhouette in pink was seen going in or out.
Since the time he moved in the newly rented house,
Two complete moon cycles had already gone by.
On a beautiful day, at the wall, on the other side
Under the peach trees, a delicate feminine silhouette seemed to come by.
He let go of his guitar, straightened his tunic and out, he hiked.
Nobody! Only a suave perfume still, in the air, lingering!
Walking slowly along the wall, observing,
He found on a peach branch, a gold hairpin dangling.
He reached out and took it home, thinking:
“This must be from a gynaeceum! How could it find its way here?
Such a precious jewel! Such a breathtaking beauty!
How could this ever fall into my hands without a predestined affinity?”
Not losing hold of it, he contemplated it constantly;
A subtle sandalwood fragrance was still lingering. The next morning
When fog was barely cleared, he sighted a girl’s silhouette wandering
Along the wall, looking for something, apparently.
The young man was on the watch already,
And behind the wall, to sound the heart, he said aloud,
“By mere chance, this hairpin I found
I wish I knew how to return it to its legitimate owner.”
Kieu’s voice immediately came from the wall over,
“To the superior man who disdains found objects goes my appreciation.
A hairpin was no object of great value, to my estimation
But truly admirable were your righteousness and noble character.”
The man said, “we were close neighbors
And of course, no stranger to each other.
I owe you so much for the perfume that, on the hairpin, still lingers.
I wish you knew the torments of my heart that have been making me suffer.
For this day, I have been waiting for a long time.
Pray, stay a moment! My heart has so much to confide!”
In haste, he returned home to take a few objects of his own:
A silk scarf and a pair of bracelets made of gold.
He swiftly crossed the wall by means of a ladder.
The belle of the other day? was that really her?
Nervous in his presence, she kept a reserved attitude, making no sound.
He looked straight in her face and she, out of shyness, looked down.
“Since the time we met by chance,” said he,
“I have been missing you in silence and hoping secretly
Grief and sorrow have emaciated my weak body.
For months during, my soul was up there in the moon palace, dreaming
I will never lose hold of the tree of waiting 
I have been embracing.
To tell you a few words, may I take the opportunity?
Will you, O precious mirror beam down on a humble duckweed like me?”
After a moment of hesitation, said she,
“Although poor, our family traditions require pure manners.
Should it be a question of marriage and love,
It was up to my parents to ultimately decide.
I do appreciate your feelings for me, a humble flower that met your sight.
But still an innocent child, give you an answer, How dare I?”
He said, :”Today was windy but tomorrow may be rainy
Do these spring days promise another encounter so happy?
If my heart sentiments were not considered favorably,
It will be no advantage for you but, of course, a big misfortune to me.
It will give me a big incentive, a word of promise now!
Then I will work out the formal engagement. I Vow!
Should Heaven fail to favor the sincere and earnest love of mine,
This life in its full spring, I would not regret to sacrifice.
If any of its spring favors your heart does not grant me,
All the pains incurred in my constancy will be lost unfairly.”
She attentively listened to these words so soothing,
And reflected in her limpid eyes were romantic feelings.
“In this first encounter,” said she, a little shy,
“Moved by your heart, how could I suppress the voice of mine?
Since your noble heart has reserved for me that great favor,
I accept to engrave your promise on stone and gold forever!”
Upon these words, his heart was entirely relieved from grief;
He handed her the gold hairpin and the pink handkerchief.
“Our centenary union starts from this moment.
To commemorate it, please accept these objects as a love token.”
Kieu had in her hand a brocade handkerchief and a gold plated fan
For the hairpin, she promptly made the exchange.
This love engagement glued them firmly together.
Suddenly they heard human voices from behind the house of hers,
Making leaves and flowers fall, they parted in a hurry:
Her, back to the finery room; him, to his study.
Now as the touchstone knew the gold titer,
Deeper became their love and more intense their longing for each other.
On the Tuong river, that shallow watercourse of longing,
One person upstream, for the other downstream, was waiting.
Just a thin wall between them was lying, but they seemed to be separated by a large expanse of snow and fog
That hindered love messages in their traveling back and forth.
Windy days and moonlit nights went by, one after the other
Spring went away: green became denser and red thinner.
Came an anniversary in her mother’s family.
Her parents and siblings dressed up excitedly,
Staying alone in the quiet and deserted house,
She thought this was a good opportunity for a meeting with him now.
After displaying fruits of the season on the table neatly,
Towards the wall, she directed her “lotus” steps promptly.
On this side of the flowers, she raised her gold voice sweetly.
On this side of the flowers, she saw him waiting there already.
He reproached her for her indifference to him,
“You let for so long the fire and incense of our love cool down.
My missing you and sadness take turn to torture me somehow.
Snow and dew have tinged half my hair with gray.”
She said, “The wind stopped me and the rain made me stay.
I know I have been unfair to you by holding you at bay.
Availing myself of the household’s absence today,
With all my love, I come here, for your great love to pay.”
The rock work in the garden, they went round;
And at the end of the wall, a passage temporarily filled up they found.
He rolled up his sleeves and cleared up the way to the fairyland.
After having carefully brushed aside the branches, they saw clearly the passage to the world of fairies.”
Their faces shone with joy as they looked at each other amorously.
She said nice things to him who inquired after her health tenderly.
Side by side, they walked into his study.
They talked about the weather, then exchanged a solemn oath of love.
A pen holder and a poem case were displayed on a stand, and above
Hung an artistic ink drawing of a pine tree,
So well done that in it the wind and dew, one could see.
She warmly praised him for his genial artistic ability, the more she looked the more animated the drawing appeared to be.
He said, “This sketch, I have just finished.
Would you please add a few commentary verses to complete it!”
With a fairy hand, breaking loose wind and rain,
On the upper corner of the drawing, she wrote a quatrain.
“How great your poetic talent is!” he praised her. Your poem sounds like a pearl-and-jade shower!
I doubt the renowned poetesses Ban and Ta could do any better.
My deeds should be very meritorious in my previous life
Because I could not have such a valuable retribution otherwise!
She said, “I allowed myself to have furtive look at your physiognomy
If you are  not a superior man, a royal court frequenter you must be.
Considering my destiny that was as thin as the wings of a dragonfly,
I wonder whether Blue Heaven, in favor of our union would decide.
I recall vividly this prediction in my infancy
Made by a physiognomist about my destiny:
Intelligence and natural gifts blooming on the outside,
This talented girl will suffer from misfortune all her life.
I look at you then consider myself introspectively,
I wonder whether it was possible to match your plenitude with my fragility.”
Said he, “Does not our unexpected encounter foretell our hymeneal affinity?
Human determination has triumphed over Heaven’s will oftentimes.
Suppose they were broken somehow, our hymeneal ties;
In compliance with my oath, I would sacrifice my life!”
All the secrets of their hearts, to each other they confided.
They enjoyed spring wine and their heart with spring joy became light.
A day of happiness seemed to be shorter than a span.
In the West, the sun was already half swallowed by the mountain range.
Feeling that in her family’s absence, it was not decent to linger,
She took leave and hurriedly returned to her house.
Back home, her parents and siblings, she found
Had not returned from the anniversary party.
She lowered the curtain of the entrance door hastily;
Then with quick and decided steps she crossed the garden by night
Where the moon drew through branches, dense and sparse patterns of light.
Through his study window, the vacillating oil lamp met her sight.
Leaning on his desk, he was just dozing off in his seat,
He was half awake, half immersed in sleep
When he was wakened by the “lotus” steps of his lover.
Under the oblique moonlight, he saw her approach with the grace of a flower
He was somewhat somnolent from his love dream.
Leaning on his desk, he was just dozing off in his seat,
He was half awake, half immersed in sleep
When he was wakened by the “lotus” steps of his lover.
Under the oblique moonlight, he saw her approach with the grace of a flower
He was somewhat somnolent from his love dream."
With eagerness, he welcomed her back ritually.
He put new candles on the lotus shaped candelabrum promptly then refilled the peach shaped incense burner.
Together they put down their love oaths on paper.
A tuft of sot hair was divided in tow with a golden knife.
The brilliant moon was shining in the sky.
Face to face, they repeated their love vows
And unbosomed themselves freely now.
Forever, the word “Union” would remain in their bones.
They drank a delicious wine out of cups with glints of gold.
A subtle perfume from her silk sash was emanating, and the images of the lovers, the mirrored screen was reflecting.
He said, “Fresh was the breeze and serene the moonlight.
I have for a long time nurtured a desire not yet satisfied.
We were not yet formally bound by engagement ties,
And I am afraid that my request will lean to the indecency side.”
She said, “We were bound together by the ties of hymen,
And a word exchanged suffices to make us intimate friends.
Let it be no question of inordinate frivolities.
Besides that, I will not refuse you whatever it might be.”
He said, “You are a guitar virtuoso and I have heard of your renown.
With Chung Ky’s fervor, I will prick up my ears for your divine sounds.”
“It was not worth much, that trivial skill of mine,” she replied.
“But since you have given the order, I must comply.”
In the hall, a guitar was hung on the wall. He hastily
Took it down and presented it to her with a gesture full of gallantry.
“ it was just a petty skill my fingers have acquired”, said she,
“The great importance you attach to it really embarrasses me.”
She tuned one by one the bass and treble strings
Until to the right pitch, all the four strings she did bring.
What a tune! The Han’s and So’s Battlefield,
Listening to it, one could perceive the clash of metal and steel
Here was the tune by Tu Ma, “The Phoenix in Search for a Spouse,”
Which like moans of resentfulness and distress did sound.
Written by Ke Khang, here was the Quang Lang measure:
Smoothness of wandering clouds, murmur of flowing water!
Finally this was the tune, “Chieu Quan Crossing the Frontier,”
Sounds of the belle’s desperate love for her king spouse and her sorrowful attachment to her sweet house.
Limpid notes sounded like migrating paradise cranes’ calls,
Troubled notes like the sounds of cascading water, midway of its fall.
Andantes, gentle as a light breeze passing
Allegros, precipitate as a sudden shower, down pouring.
Dim then bright, the light of the lamp was flickering
The music immersed him in melancholic dreaming.
Now he bent his head, now on his knees he was leaning.
Sometimes he felt his entrails lacerated, sometimes he was frowning.
He said, “That was exquisitely beautiful really,
But it left in me a sense of bitterness and a taste of pungency!
Why did you choose those tunes with so much poignancy?
They convulse the hearts of your listeners while hurting you inside!”
“It was a bad habit of mine,” she replied.
Are not sadness or gaiety dispositions received from the Sky?”
Your words were gold. I accept with deference your noble advice.
Maybe, little by little, I will succeed in correcting my imperfection.
Flower and perfume added new charm to her peachy complexion;
His ogles were now full of love tenderness.
In him strong love waves gained tempestuousness,
And his token of affection already showed some licentiousness.
“Do not consider this as game of pleasure,” she said.
“Back up, Please! Let me finish one thing I have to say.
I have no intention of exaggerating the value a young peach tree,
And to close the rose garden to the blue bird was not my objective.
You consider me as your fiancée already,
And to be virgin on the nuptial night was a wife’s first duty.
Those who, on the river and in the mulberry fields, give themselves easily
Are worthless and wanted by no man, definitely!
Are we those who before getting it spend already their money?
The pureness of the entire conjugal life, why waste it in a single day?
Among the famous love stories recorded in history,
The couple Thoi and Truong was the best as everyone can see.
But pre-nuptial bodily union broke the oaths of those great lovers;
Too much complaisance made them tired of each other.
While their wings were joining and their branches interfacing,
They felt born in their hearts a contemptuous feeling.
In the West pavilion, they let the incense of their love cool down,
Transforming an ideal love to estrangement somehow.
Should I not guard myself now by acting categorically, 
While their wings were joining and their branches interfacing,
They felt born in their hearts a contemptuous feeling.
In the West pavilion, they let the incense of their love cool down,
Transforming an ideal love to estrangement somehow.
Should I not guard myself now by acting categorically
When it started growing pale on the roof, the moonlight,
A messenger came to the entrance gate and called from outside.
In great haste she left for the room of embroidery,
And he crossed the front yard in a hurry.
Hardly had the sash bolt of the exterior gate been drawn out,
A teen-age servant of his family rushed in to give him a letter
Announcing the sudden death of his father’s younger brother,
Whose coffin should be brought home from Lieu Duong, a faraway land
Up mounts down dales, across rivers and large expanses of sand.
His father, in the letter, called him back for the funeral urgently.
He was dumbfounded at the bad news definitely.
He stealthily came to the apartments of his lover to impart the bad news with all the details to her:
How bad his uncle’s death struck the family members
And why he had to leave her and suffer.
“This unexpected misfortune strikes when we need more time for confidences,” he whined.
“How painful it is! Even for a formal engagement, we have no time!
But the moon up there, witness of our oath, still shines
You’ll be out of my sight but never out of my mind.
For three winters, I will be away, a thousand miles.
Before the knots of my grief were undone,
Please take good care of your body of jade and gold to prevent my worries and give me peace of mind
When I am beyond the clouds, at the edge of the sky.”
These words made her heart squirm from laceration,
She imparted her feelings with a voice broken by emotion,
“O Hymeneal God! Why this victimization?
Before the joy of union, why this heart rending separation?
But our grave love oaths have been exchanged
My hair may be snow white but my heart will remain unchanged!
The months and years of waiting, I do not mind.
But you eating in the wind and sleeping in the rain makes me sigh.
Fidelity to you for life, I have vowed!
I will not pass to anyone love boat with my guitar, I swear now!
As long as mountains and rivers remain, certainly will come better days
You’ll definitely return and remember the person of today.”
Holding each other’s hand they were reluctant to part,
But dawn appeared suddenly over the roof, chasing away the dark.
He hesitantly went away; each parting step harrowed his mind.
With tears running down his cheeks, he said good-bye one more time.
The horse was saddled and the luggage to the pole was securely tied.
The pain was shared half and half between the lovers; the parting road divided the couple and set them asunder.
But dawn appeared suddenly over the roof, chasing away the dark.
He hesitantly went away; each parting step harrowed his mind.
With tears running down his cheeks, he said good-bye one more time.
The horse was saddled and the luggage to the pole was securely tied.
The pain was shared half and half between the lovers;
The parting road divided the couple and set them asunder.
To talk with her, they did not have the time
When a gang of henchmen noisily burst into the house from all sides.
Holding sticks under their arms of machetes in their hands,
The beastly sycophants set the entire house into ebullition, and
Promptly put stocks around the necks of the old man and his male child.
With an infamous cord, father and son together, they tied.
The house was filled with a horrible buzzing of the blowflies.
Demolished looms, crushed needlework boxes, what a terrible sight!
Everything, from valuables to personal properties,
Was carried off to fill the pockets of those people so greedy.
Of this unexpected misfortune, who was the mastermind?
Who deployed the net? Who triggered the trap? Who was behind?
Later on, after a long inquiry, they did find
That a silk peddler had accused them, and they were victimized.
The whole family was panic stricken and confounded,
The outcries of injustice would shake the ground, the falsity of the indictment would blur the clouds.
The family spent the whole day in humble supplications
But on deaf ears fell all their entreaties and petitions, and those despicable hands continued their torturous actions.
The suspects were hung on a high beam, their heads dangling.
A stone would be moved by this spectacle, much less human beings.
On all the faces, fear and suffering were showing.
To whom could the victims complain about this injustice, if not to heaven? But Heaven was too high to reach!
Of course, the satellites’ manners were familiar to everybody;
They inflicted ruin and pain on people only to extort money.
Preserving the lives of our loved ones was of the greatest importance
In a catastrophe, the best way was to bow to circumstances.
On one hand, woven by that providential encounter, were the love ties; and on the other, gratefulness due to parents which morality required.
Love or filial piety? The scale would tip on which side?
The love oaths taken before the sea and mountain, one should not mind,
To pay the debt of gratitude to parents was the first duty of a child.
She declared after making up her mind,
“Stop! Let me sell myself to ransom father’s life.”
There was Mr. Chung, an old pen pusher, one of the satellites.
Although working in the yamen, he was exceptionally kind.
Noticing her a high sense of filial piety and noble sentiments,
He developed a compassion for her being in such a predicament.
After figuring how much to bribe and how to win favors from authorities,
He said the case needed three hundred taels of gold really.
He obtained to keep at interim the suspects at his home
And told Kieu to come up in two or three days with the gold.
O! Poor little heart, lacerated and rent, of an innocent child
Upon whom misfortune swooped down by surprise!
Here came the cruel separation as painful as that caused by demise.
What did her love stand for when stood for nothing her own life?
What did it matter her humble destiny? Just of a drop of rain falling!
To pay her debt of existence due to her father, she was willing.
She made her intention known to an intermediary.
The news spread, provoking a raft attention immediately.
In the neighborhood, there was a certain lady.
She brought in a stranger to make inquiries.
To the question about his name, the answer was Sinh Giam Ma.
To the question about his origin, the answer was” Lam Thanh, not far.
He was a middle-aged man, probably in his early forties.
His face was well groomed and he dressed with flamboyance.
The master walked ahead, followed by a noisy cohort of servants.
The middleperson led him ceremoniously into the apartments.
He settled himself in the seat of honor with much arrogance.
In the interior room, the go-between urged Kieu to come out immediately.
Her love pains worsened the hatred caused by the misfortune of her family.
At each step she made on the floral floor, many tears ran down her face.
As if intimidated by the wind and dew, she walked with a hesitant pace.
She felt ashamed, looking at the flowers, and saw her face of dishonor, looking in the mirror.
The go-between arranged her hair and held her and with more fervor.
Her melancholic features, the pallor of a wilted mum reminded and her emaciated silhouette, a slim apricot branch looked like.
Meticulously the client appraised her beauty and measured her talents.
He made her play the guitar and write poems on fan to test her endowments.
The more he looked at her exquisite charm, the more he liked.
Satisfied, he skillfully tackled the question of price.
He said, “To acquire a good precious stone, I go to Lam Dien mine
Please let me know about the price of gifts this marriage requires.”
“One thousand taels of gold was a fair price.” The go-between replied.
“But due to the family misfortune, we leave it entirely to your generosity.”
They cut down one teal here, added two there and finally
Agreed to a price of over four hundred after a discussion quite lengthy.
The word was given and the deal was closed finally
Cards were then exchanged as proof of engagement.
They fixed the date of wedding gift remittance and the date for bringing the bride to the groom’s residence
With money ready, anything could be arranged easily.
Mr. Chung was asked for intervention immediately.
A request was filed, and Mr. Vuong was freed temporarily.
The young child meeting her father! What a poignant sight!
With a bleeding heart and tangled entrails, he looked at her, then cried,
“In raising a girl, a father looks in the future, cherishing a desire
That she will wed a suitable man and have a happy life.
Why were you so cruel to us? O, Sky?
Who was liable for this terrible slander that disunites?
All the tortures and atrocities on the remnant of body, I do not mind!
 it was a horrible injustice for me to see in calamity my innocent child.
Sooner or later, every man must die.
I would rather disappear from this life than be in such a plight.”
While he was talking, abundant tears covered his face.
Suddenly, he dashed head first to the wall with a lightning pace.
People rushed in to hold him and keep him within sight.
With a soothing voice to dissuade her father Kieu tried:
“What was worth a rosy cheeked fragile child
Who has not paid, even a bit, her debt of education and life?
Ashamed for being outdone by Miss Oanh, I do feel she could save her father by writing an appeal.
How could I let myself be defeated by Ly, who sold herself for the salvation of her daddy and family?
O, Father! Your age will increase as time goes by
A tree that supports numerous branches, you were like.
If your heart does not tear itself from our mutual affection ties,
The destruction of our sweet family, I can see it in my mind.
 it was better that I am the only one who makes the sacrifice.
As long as the tree keeps all its verdant leaves alive, it does not matter if only one flower, of petals was deprived.
I resign to my destiny, whatever it might be,
Think of me as a child you lost at her early infancy or a young fruit that fell at its early stage from a tree.
Do not let grief confuse you and give you ideas so silly!
You would otherwise lose your life uselessly and ruin our family.”
To those words of reason, the old man deferred.
Shedding abundant tears, they looked at each other.
But already, they heard from outside Mr. Ma’s appearance.
Marriage contract was signed, then came the gold remittance.
O, Hymeneal God! How cruel you appeared to be!
With no consideration, you tied the hymeneal threads whimsically!
When one had in one’s hand money aplenty,
One could at will change black to white easily.
To smooth things out, with all his efforts Mr. Chung tried.
The case was dismissed after the authorities had been duly bribed.
Temporarily, they were settled somehow, Kieu’s family matters,
But already, pressure was put on the family for the bride’s departure.
She was all by herself under the lamp, very late at night.
Tears soaked her robe; her hair became dry in her plight.
“My destiny was sad but I have to accept it no matter how bad it may be,
But I suffer because my word of engagement was given already.
He took lots of pain and trouble up to this point in time.
Yet, my profound love for him now ruins his sentimental life.
Humid still was the gold cup from which I drank the wine of love vows,
But I brutally disappoint him by breaking my oath now!
Lieu Duong was very far away, but I do not know how many miles.
I never thought the destruction of our happiness would be a deed of mine!
Bonds of affection, love debts and love oaths,
They were for this existence all irremediably lost!
My love vow, however, still binds me in my next reincarnation.
I shall be born as a horse or a buffalo to fulfill my obligation.
My love to him, I have not paid, so it seems.
Into my tomb, I shall bring all my love for him and transform it into an indestructible love crystal. O, dear Kim!”
Those intimate thoughts tortured her in secrecy,
Oil ran low in the lamp; her kerchief was soaked in tears of misery.
Thuy Van roused up from her spring slumbers suddenly.
She came to the lamp and tenderly made inquiries,
“Heaven’s mystical machine brings about so many events whimsically,
For the family, you have all by yourself suffered the injustice of destiny.
But why do you sit up the entire night?
No doubt, something sentimental preoccupies your mind.”
“My heart was sobbing painfully!” Kieu said.
“ it was still caught up in a love knot so intricate.
I feel ashamed when opening my lips to say this secret,
But keeping it in my heart, I feel I betray his love that was so great.
I would like to ask you a favor, and if you agree,
I will first kowtow to you then I will speak. So take a seat please!
In mid way, they suddenly burst asunder, my love ties.
The broken hymeneal threads, now  it was up to you to splice.
Since my first encounter with Kim, we have often been in sight.
We have exchanged fans of promise in day time and drunk the wine of love oath at night.
All of a sudden, a violent storm came unexpectedly.
How could I save both my love and my filial piety?
You still have many spring days ahead of you, really.
Have pity for me: I have the same blood as yours in my body, take my place to realize my oath taken in front of mountains and seas.
If so, when my flesh was decomposed and my bones pulverized,
In the next world, I shall in your happiness take pride, and in my tomb, I will be able to give a contented smile.
Here were the bracelets and the paper bearing our oath,
They were token of love and hymen, so keep both.
If you become his wife by substituting me,
You will certainly feel compassion for me, a girl with a sad destiny.
I shall disappear from this world but these vestiges:
This guitar and these pieces of oath incense will outlive me.
Later on, if you happen 
to tune this guitar and light this incense, please.
Look out and observe the grass tips and tree leaves,
It will be me coming back if you see them flickering under a soft breeze.
My soul still bears the heavy weight of my love oath, so it seems.
I will destroy this frail body of mine to pay my love debt to him.
Then, my face will not be seen, my voice will not be heard by the living.
Please sprinkle a cup of water for me as I die from unjust suffering.
I am now, alas! like a broken hairpin, a shattered mirror.
How can I tell all the wonderful feelings of our immense love?
O, Kim! I kowtow before you one hundred times, one thousand times.
Here it ends! It was so short, the life of our hymeneal ties!
O, my fate! How could my fate be so repugnant!
Here I am, a flower drifting on water at the mercy of the current.
O Kim dearest! O, Kim, my earnest lover!
My betraying you starts form this moment! It was over, all over!”
Her last word barely finished, her heart failed and she fainted away.
Her breathing stopped and her icy hands did not sway.
Father and Mother roused up from slumbers;
The entire household rushed in and crowded the chamber.
Everyone was busy offering care and remedy.
Her cheeks were still wet when she regained her consciousness finally.
Upon questions about the reasons of that sudden illness,
She could not articulate even a word because of sobbing from distress.
Van, in a whisper, unveiled the whole secret,
Then added, “this was the oath paper and these were the bracelets.”
“Thus,” said the father “I have thwarted your marriage arrangement.
Well, in such a predicament, your sister was there as your replacement.
Because of whom, the mustard seed was detached from amber? and the needle from the magnet was set asunder?
Because of whom my dear child was condemned to a miserable erring life?
Do not you worry! We shall comply with your noble recommendation.
Even when stone was worn out, will be certainly realized your intention.”
Kieu kowtowed before her father then with hesitation said,
Thanks to you, I can fulfill my love obligation to my best.
The life of a slave that was waiting for me was not worth a penny;
It really does not matter even if my bones whiten in an alien country.”
The pain and distress Kieu was suffering were really beyond expression.
At the southern tower, the guard’s tom-tom resounded with acceleration.
A flowery palankeen came to the entrance door already.
Already, an irrelevant nuptial music signaled the parting noisily.
Poignant was the pain of the departing person and of those left behind.
Their abundant tears would soak the marble tiles, and their lacerated hearts squirmed like silkworms at separation time.
Dusk came with dark clouds covering the sky,
Sadness wilted the grass, dew damped the branches at the fall of night.
In procession, she was brought to an inn where the groom resided,
And within the walls of covetousness she was confined.
She felt in disgrace, and of her beauty she was ashamed.
Thinking of her situation, she felt heart twinges over and over again.
“Fallen into villain’s hands, this fairy body!
Alas! All my efforts to guard my chastity have been wasted painfully!
If I knew someday I would fall so miserably low,
I would have offered the nectar of my peach flower to my beau.
Because I fended off all the advances of his carnal desire for me,
When he was here, I punished him unfairly; and when he left, I did make him suffer ruefully.
Suppose I could see him again in a new encounter,
Could this debased person of mine expect anything? No, never!
Since I am predestined to an unfortunate adventurous life,
Continue living an ordinary woman’s life, how could I?”
Her wandering gaze met with a knife lying on a stand;
She seized it and hid it in her kerchief with nimble hands.
Whenever the deluge water, at her feet arrived,
The knife would serve to end her miserable life.
In an autumn night, endless were the hours of restlessness
Solitude and meditative thoughts immersed her in obliviousness.
About Ma, she did not ever surmise
That he was a gambler and an incorrigible lusty guy.
Master of revels, he found himself in a period of bad luck in gambling,
And in his familiar world of debauchery, he had to work for a living.
There was a woman named Tu Ba in the pleasure village,
A former prostitute deprived of attractiveness because of old age.
Chance brought her and Ma together.
Belonging to the same category because of their odious characters,
They opened a saloon and became partners,
All year long selling carnal love to revelers.
They scoured cities and countryside for the so-called maids
That they actually trained in the carnal love trade.
Good luck or bad luck, that’s Heaven’s business strictly.
This time the “Rent Entrails Corporation” chose a girl with a sad destiny!
A thousand pities for her, such a great beauty!
Sold to immoral traffickers, that blooming flower so lovely!
She was now caught unaware in their trap of cheating:
Low price marriage gifts, phony wedding.
“The flag has now fallen into my hand!” Ma thought, secretly delighted.
“The more I look at her features of jade, the more I like.
She surely was a perfume from Heaven, a beauty queen of the nation.
A smile of hers was worth a thousand taels of gold, no exaggeration.
When she was in the saloon, to be the first to pick the flower,
Princes and noble clients will compete with one another.
Three hundred taels at least!
Enough for capital recuperation, the coming money will be all profit.
A choice cut was now within my mouth’s reach.
I want to lose no capital but the godsend tempts me quite a bit.
Now that the Immortals’ peach was already in my profane hands,
To quench my thirst, let me pick the fruit by curbing the branch.
Here below, among the playboys and flower lovers,
Very few could boast they were real flower connoisseurs.
Pomegranate peal extract mixed with cockscomb blood
And a little know how can restore things to the original status.
And a little subterfuge was enough to take in the naïve;
We will get the same price and no loss shall we see.
Should the old woman know and make a fuss about this,
Half a day of penance on knees would suffice.
I am now a long way from home, so my inaction
Will certainly arouse in her some suspicion.”
O, poor tender camellia flower!
The profane bee swooped down and brutally opened his way into her!
The violent storm raged on heavily
With no consideration for her delicate body and the perfume of her beauty.
After that love nightmare, she woke up to find
Herself lying all alone in bed under the nuptial lights.
As in a downpour, her tears flowed abundantly,
Against that stranger, tears of animosity and against herself, tears of repugnancy.
“What species does he belong to, that man so filthy?
Now becomes the disgrace of womankind this good-as-gold body!
I have nothing left, not even hope! Nothing but misery!
With what happened to me, my life was truly over.”
Anger against her karma and resentment against herself made her suffer.
She took out the knife and prepared to end her life
When suddenly a thought flashed through her mind,
“As far as I am concerned, it was alright, but how about my dear parents who have given me life?
I must think of all the consequences that seem to be possible:
My suicide could trigger an investigation to hold them responsible.
The rancor in my heart will gradually calm down,
Sooner or later this must happen somehow.”
She continued to consider and reconsider her reasoning
When cockcrows from all around the house started resounding.
And the morning fog rang with horn sounds from the watchtower.
The departure order was hurriedly given by Ma Giam Sinh,
How heart rending was the moment of parting!
The horse hoofs were jerking and the cartwheels jolting.
At the ten-mile rest area, 
Mr. Vuong gave a farewell party.
While the host and the guests were carousing in the dining area noisily,
In an interim room, Kieu kept her mother company.
They looked at each other and shed tears abundantly.
To her mother’s ear, Kieu whispered her worries:
“I regret the fact that I was born a girl,
When could I pay back the parental blessings I have received since my birth?
The vicissitudes of life have dragged me down into such a sad plight!
Now, I have to leave with you love and gratitude of mine!
Considering the events that, in the last few days, have occurred,
I am afraid I have fallen into the hands of an experienced swindler.
Upon arrival, he left me alone in his chamber.
When he entered, he appeared to be ill at ease and when he went out, he seemed to flee.
When he spoke, he often made blunders.
Now he treated me as his wife, now as house helper, and he seemed to have no respect for me whatsoever.
His manners were far different from those of people with decent character.
At close look, he appears to be nothing but a swindler.
Alas! Your daughter was out and down! Nothing to talk about her life!
She shall live a miserable life of exile, and shall be buried in alien land when she dies.”
After listening to those distressing cries,
Mrs. Vuong, with her outcries of injustice, wanted to rend the sky.
To empty their last cups of farewell, the guests did not yet have the time
When outside, Ma already urged the departure several times.
With a heart heavy with compassion and pity,
Mr. Vuong came to Ma, who was already on saddle and made these entreaties,
“My girl, frail as a willow and delicate as a tender peach tree,
By our family misfortune has been shoved down to slavery.
She was leaving us now for unknown seas and skies;
She shall be alone on alien lands, rain or shine.
To your noble tutelage, I entrust her;
From frost and snow, please give her cover as to a climbing vine, a secular pine would offer.”
To this plea, Ma Giam Sinh respectfully replied,
“Our feet were securely bound together by hymeneal ties.
In the future, should I fail to fulfill my conjugal duties,
Up there to witness, the sun and the moon will still be, and I shall be punished by the swords of Divinities.”
With the din of a storm that raised wind and rolled clouds,
The carriage moved off and disappeared in a swirl of dust and sounds.
The unfortunate parents looked in the direction of their daughter
They would, day after day, scan the same horizon, searching for her.
To unknown regions she traveled long, long miles,
Crossing bridges white with frost, under dark cloudy skies.
Under the autumnal breeze, seas of reeds were undulating;
The sadness of the autumn sky seemed to be reserved for only one being.
The vault of heaven appeared to be vertiginously high at night, and the horizon was blurred by a haze thin and light.
Looking at the moon bright in the sky, she felt ashamed of the solemn oath she took with Kim that night.
The deep green autumn forests displayed some yellow spots already.
The migrating birds calls made her miss her parents painfully.
Before her eyes, unfamiliar scenery unfolded sadly.
After a full month, the bridal caravan arrived at Lam Tri finally.
As her beaded carriage stopped at the front door of a house,
She saw a woman, from behind the stores come out.
At first glance, Kieu was shocked by the woman’s cadaverous skin, really.
What could she have eaten to be so tall and so bulky?
The woman came to the carriage and welcomed her with vulgar expression.
Kieu entered the house, following her invitation.
On one side , a few girls with painted eyebrows were chatting
On the other, four or five roisterers were sitting.
In the middle stood an altar with an incense burner
And above it, there hung a white-browed genie’s picture.
That was the custom followed by all pleasure inns,
Such trade required such patron jinn.
Morning and evening, worship was conducted with incense and flowers.
When a girl, because of bad luck, saw her clientele grow fewer,
In front of the genie’s picture, she took off skirt and blouse of hers.
Stark, she lighted some incense and invoked the genie in a murmur.
She changed the flowers, put the old ones under the sleeping mat of hers.
From all sides, noisy clients then would flock to her in great number.
Kieu seemed lost and, unaware of what happened to her,
She prostrated upon order of the old woman, who began her prayer,
“May our business know more and more prosperity.
May each night be a Han-Thuc feast and each day a Nguyen Tieu party
May thousands of men become infatuated after casting sight on her
May a multitude of revelers and roisterers flock around her, may our place be crowded with friendly customers
May she be flooded everyday with love notes and letters
May she see to the front door a completely satisfied customer only to welcome at the back door a new lover.”
Kieu listened to this strange invocation but did not comprehend it fully.
She felt, however, she was in a shady house truly.
After the worship ceremony in front of the altar,
Tu Ba settled herself majestically on a wooden bed sofa.
“Come here” she ordered. “Kowtow before your mother, my child!
Then you’ll go to kowtow to your uncle on the other side.”
Kieu said, “Misfortune has condemned me to a life of exile,
And I must resign to the lot of a concubine.
But you take the oriole for the swallow, may I ask why?
Innocent and inexperienced, I do not know what was my position.
The wedding was duly celebrated with marriage gifts and nuptial procession.
We have had carnal relations as husband and wife
But the rank has been changed, and I really do not know why.
I venture to present these facts just to clarify.”
Now, the old woman became aware of what had happened.
She immediately got into an outrageous fit of tantrums,
“Well, well, that’s manifest, clear and evident.
So, you have shamelessly taken from me my husband!
And you! you are  supposed to go and recruit girls if they were pretty
Then bring them home to entertain our clientele for money.
You, ungrateful rascal! You behave like a villain!
Tempted by carnal desire, you did try the godsend!
Lost was the finish of the new material!
It was all over! Gone to the devil the invested capital!
And you! You have been sold to me.
Once in this house, my rule you must obey.
When the old man went ahead with his sin,
Why did not you slap his face? Why did you listen to him?
Why did you let him take you without any reaction?
So young and you are  already tempted by that titillation!
I must show you what my discipline was like!”
Taking a double leather whip, the old woman came to her, ready to strike.
Kieu exclaimed, “O, thick Earth! O, high Sky!
Since the day I left home, this life I have sacrificed!
Let me end it! Mothing to regret, nothing to remember by!”
She took out the knife hidden in her sleeve, immediately.
Wondering whether, to destroy her precious body she had the audacity,
The old woman scanned her face when Kieu made the fatal gesture suddenly.
Alas! Such an uncanny talent! Such a breathtaking beauty!
The cruel knife just cut her ties with this world! What a pity!
The news of the sad event spread in no time.
And the house, by a compact crowd was occupied.
Plunged in a coma, she appeared to be sleeping.
Looking at her, the old woman started shivering.
They brought Kieu to an interior chamber;
They kept vigil on her and sent for a doctor.
But she was not finished yet with this worldly life.
In her torpor, she seemingly saw a young lady standing by her side.
“The cause-and-effect law has not completed its cycle,” whispered the lady.
“How could you, from your debt of Rent Entrails, escape so easily?
The karma of rosy cheeks still lies heavy on your destiny.
With determination you want to end it, but Heaven approval is not ready!
Try to complete your existence of [an] unfortunate lady.
At the Tien Duong River, our next rendezvous shall be.”
After a full day of extensive medical care given to her,
Her consciousness, Kieu finally recovered.
Tu Ba who was keeping vigil at bed side,
To wheedle her with soothing words, tried,
“Every one of us has at our disposition only one body in this life.
Your beauty was radiant and bright, and your spring days still last for a long time.
You could have been victim of either a misunderstanding or an error.
Considering your virtue, how could I force you into carnal pleasure?
By coming here, you have certainly gone astray,
But you can lock yourself up, waiting for the nuptial day.
Nothing was lost as long as you are  still alive,
You can find a suitable gentleman and become his wife.
Your desperate act will bring nothing but sad plight!
Why do you want to destroy yourself and ruin me at the same time?
Whispering in her ears, these entreaties and arguments
Had the power to convince Kieu and bring her to reason.
According to the divine message received during her unconsciousness,
In any present karma or destiny, Heaven’s will seemed to be manifest.
If a debt of this life was only paid by partial remittance,
The balance due was carried over to the next existence.
Kieu listened to Tu Ba’s exhortation attentively.
She said, “I do not want that to happen, really.
If I only obtain what you have just promised, I shall be more than lucky.
But whether what was agreed today shall remain so tomorrow, I still wonder.
I am afraid I shall be exposed to revelers and pleasure seekers.
If so,  it was better to die in chastity than to live in dishonor.”
The old woman said: “Do not you worry, my dear child!
Take pleasure in deceiving you, how could I?
Should I ever fail to deep my promise,
The sun above my head will never let such an offence go unpunished.”
After listening to those words said so earnestly and categorically,
Kieu found consolation and restored her calmness gradually.
In front of the Azure Crystal Pavilion where Kieu led a cloistered life,
She had no other companion than the mountain silhouettes at the skyline and the moon that came to visit with her at night.
Her eyes could travel freely to the distant horizon in day time
When she saw sand hills and rosy dust from roads rise.
In the morning she contemplated the clouds with melancholy, and the lamp that lighted her nights made her feel so lonely.
Sentiments and sceneries seemed to share her sad mind.
Thinking of him who had emptied with her the love cup in the moonlight,
She imagined he still was waiting in vain for news of her.
Under this distant sky, in this sea corner, dhe was totally separated from her family and her lover.
But her profound love for him never became discolored.
Her mind then went to her parents waiting for her every day at the door
“Who fans them now in summer and warms them in winter?” she wondered,
“I have been far away from home for so long a time,
The trunk of the catalpa at home should have by now attained armful size.”
Sadly she looked at the estuary in the evening twilight,
The sail of a boat disappeared then reappeared to her sight.
Sadly she looked at the river, into the sea flowing
Where could land those flowers, at the mercy of the waves floating?
Sadly she looked at the prairie where grass was drooping;
Into the same shade of blue, earth and clouds were mingling.
Sadly, she looked at the water in the bay that the wind was swirling,
The waves’ uproar was assailing the place where she was sitting.
All around her, she found only alien skylines!
Inspired by her exile, she chanted a quatrain she just improvised.
Then sadly, she lowered her beaded curtains to cover the sight
When she heard a man’s voice responding to her poem with the same rime.
It was a young man in the prime of his life,
Well groomed, elegantly dressed and polite.
He should be, she thought, well educated and kind.
His name was So Khanh as revealed later by her inquiries.
He caught a glimpse of her beautiful face through the blinds
And showed the attitude of a man with enamored mind.
“Alas! Perfume from Heaven! Beauty Queen of the empire!
What misfortune that misled you to this place?
O, Queen of the moon! O, Fairy Maid!
Flower! Why such a downfall! O, flower!
All my being revolts against iniquitous Old Heaven at this hour.
O! My poor heart! Who will understand your sentiments?
If only the belle, in the hero had confidence!
Setting her at liberty? A child play! I will do it with no reluctance
Kieu had closed the outside shutters of her window
But still hear those engaging words resounding by echo.
Her thoughts went to the man then came back to herself.
The more she appreciated his compassion, the more relieved she felt.
After so many harrowing days she had suffered,
She wondered when this miserable life of hers would be over.
She wrote him a letter, risking her safety,
Asking him to give a helping hand to a person floundering in misery.
In the letter, she told him all her story:
How she had sacrificed for her family, how her life had gone astray.
As soon as the sun lifted the morning fog on the following day,
She found the opportunity to send the note away.
At sunset, when the last golden rays of the day
Were still lingering, the answer from the young man arrived.
She immediately opened the letter with floral design
To find only two characters “Tich Viet” quite challenging.
She decomposed  the scripts and tried to figure out the secret meaning:
Would the twenty-first, hour of the Dog be the date and time of meeting?
The evening birds started returning to the forest like flying arrows.
The moon in its last quarter already set camellia flowers aglow.
Kieu saw at the East wall tree branches agitate under the moonlight.
Then So Khanh, who opened the window to enter, met her sight.
Shy and confused, she braced herself up to welcome him ritually.
She kowtowed and in a low voice, told him all her story,
“I am nothing but an unfortunate woman tossed by destiny,
Away from my family, in this house of debauchery.
I earnestly implore you to restore my life to decency;
My debt of gratitude to you, I swear to remember.”
Sitting, he listened attentively then nodded to her,
“It was good that you address to me, not to someone else,” said he.
“Since you have, for help called upon me,
To save you, I shall silt up the sea of misfortune if need be.”
She said, “I throw myself upon your generosity.
Would you please, find a way to end my misery?”
He said, “I have horses extremely rapid
And a very strong servant, an accomplished athlete.
Let us slip away, seizing this good opportunity.
Is not this the best out of all means of gaining liberty?
On our way to freedom, should any problem arise,
I would be there to protect you and you’ll be alright.”
His dubious talk aroused her suspicion,
But it was too late to think of the risk of the action.
So she followed him as if with closed eyes
To see where capricious Heaven would lead her from her current plight.
They stealthily went down the stairs together.
Using horses, the small group left silently one after the other.
The autumn night was wearing on slowly, but finally dawn was approaching.
Trees were shedding their leaves because the wind was rising, and behind the mountains, half the moon was already sinking.
On the trail, grass, covered with dew, appeared pale to her sight.
Each step on the road echoed painfully in her nostalgic mind.
Precipitate cock-a-doodle-doos started echoing suddenly,
And behind them a babble of human voice was heard clearly.
Panic stricken, she felt her heart throbbing rapidly.
So Khanh had turned bridle to an unknown direction.
Left alone, she did not know what to do in such a situation.
In the forest, with unsteady steps of the horse she advanced, terrified.
O, Creator! were you really so mean and unkind?
Why do you persist in torturing her beautiful body and mind?
A group of people enclosed her on all sides.
Claws to go underground, where could she find? And she did not have wings to fly up to the sky!
Old Tu Ba ran to her, direct
And angrily dragged her home at one stretch.
With belligerence and without interrogation,
The old woman battered her without interruption.
Human beings have the same sensitive skin and flesh
And they all suffer when beaten or thrashed.
she showed submission and exhausted her vocabulary for entreating;
Her back muscles failed to support her, by dint of kowtowing; she hit her head against the ground until her forehead was bleeding.
She said, “I am only a woman, unfortunate,
Snatched from home and brought, up mounts down dales to this place.
In your hands were now my death and my life,
I have come to a point where there was nothing I mind.
I hold my person and my life of no account,
My unfortunate fate was already sealed now! But you must think of your investment somehow.
Mud stains on its head, an eel living in mud never minds!
From now on, that remaining purity in me, I promise to rectify.”
Tu Ba, who was waiting for these words, jumped on the occasion.
She demanded a guarantor and a written confession.
Ma Kieu, one of the girls in Tu Ba’s house of debauchery,
Out of compassion, risked to be Kieu’s guarantee.
The old woman kept on sermonizing, reprimanding and questioning
And did not stopped until it became for Kieu overwhelming.
They carried her inside for some relaxation.
Ma Kieu opened out to her and gave some recommendation.
“You have been victim of a fraud but now,  it was over.
Everyone here knows So Khanh was a swindler.
He was well-known in the world of pleasure as an infamous cheater
Who knows how many girls have been buried by that impostor?
In backlash strike, he was a great expert.
He and the old woman have always worked in concert.
He got from her hands thirty taels of gold
Otherwise, there was no entrapment so bold.
Once the trick was accomplished, he always makes a volte face.
Watch your tongue and your temper or your life will be at stake!”
Kieu said, “He gave me a promise so serious.
How could he turn out to be so mean and dangerous?”	
She was still thinking of the event and its development
When the crook’s shameless face made an appearance.
So Khanh raised his voice, to nobody in particular addressing,
“I hear that a certain girl, here living,
Spread a rumor accusing me of seducing and swindling.
Let her look at my face to see who was talking.”
“It was over! Let’s not talk about it,” said she.
“Since you say ‘No’, I agree; and ‘No’ let it be.
So Khanh started shouting and yelling
And belligerently advanced towards her, ready for striking.
“O, Heaven! Do you know?” exclaimed she.
“Who seduced me? Who eloped with me?
Who lured me and then into a deep well shoved me?
Who talked, then swallowed his word immediately?
I Still have the letter with the words ‘Tich Viet’ in my hand.
That face and this face must be definitely of the same man!”
Kieu’s sincere words moved all those who were present.
Some condemned his betrayal; others said he was malevolent.
Out of arguments and feeling ashamed, 
He took French leave.
Left alone in her room, she started sobbing desperately
And became rueful at the thought of her sad destiny.
“Dear me! Born noble, I was very proud of my purity!
Now, destiny wants me, like anybody else, to suffer from injuries.
Sad or happy, it was after all, only human existence.
And furthermore, it can not last forever, the life of a beautiful woman
I did not build up a better karma in my previous existence.
So, in this life I have to pay my debt balance.
Anyway, the vase was broken already.
I must pay in full my debt to life with my body!”
Kieu gradually recovered, and her face was again radiant and bright.
Tu Ba then dropped by and gave her some advice,
“The art of pleasure requires much pain and hard work to master.
We should know all the secrets of this business of pleasure.”
She replied, “My job was to entertain our customers.
That’s already a big sacrifice on my part and I can not go any further.”
The old woman said, “They were alike, all men.
They expect something when they come here with money to spend.
Many interesting things the arcana of our trade comprises:
How and when to offer oneself and how to resist at night, how and when to hold aloof or to unbosom oneself in daytime.
Learn this by heart, my child!
Seven methods of seduction were required on the open side and in intimacy, eight erotic practices you should mind.
Give pleasure until customers were satiated to repletion,
Until those stone-frigid men have pleasurable carnal sensation, until life sinks into amorous passion.
Now a romantic ogle, now a serious knitting of the eyebrows,
Now a poem praising the moon, now playing with the flowers as in a show.
All these were included in the practice of the trade.
Until you master them all, you will not be a good maid.”
Kieu listened to those teachings with submission
Knitted in displeasure were her eyebrows and pale was her complexion.
She felt ashamed and mortified when listening to Tu Ba’s verbalizing.
Life really contained many surprises and absurdities so shocking!
She felt sorry for herself: “But lately, I was raised in a luxury house
And to enter life, I have to learn silly notions now!
My visage in hardened by shame and dishonor.
A human being could not fall any lower!
Pity for me, a girl living in exile!
Anyway to alien hands, my sad fate has been consigned!”
So in her room, pink curtains were lowered.
The more she appeared inaccessible, the more she was preferred.
Coming for their favorite flower were myriads of bees and butterflies.
Month-long revelries, joyous laughter throughout the night.
A leaf palpitating in all winds, a branch hospitable to birds of all kinds.
She bade adieu to Tong Ngoc in daytime to welcome Trang Khanh at night.
In the aftermath of parties, in the solitude of predawn time,
She shuddered with pains, bemoaning her unfortunate life,
“Not long ago, I still was living in utmost luxury,
Why am I now like a flower thrown on the road, trampled and lonely?
O, my poor face! It has become hardened by shame and obloquy.
O, my poor body! Bees and butterflies, have explored it to satiety!
Let those playboys and revelers go on with their erotic caresses,
I really do not know what was carnal love voluptuousness.”
She spent time contemplating flowers and enjoying the breeze.
She liked landscapes in a snow flurry and moonlit scenery
But to her, any landscape or scenery appeared somewhat gloomy.
To a sad person, how could scenery offer any gaiety?
She sought relief in painting and poem composing,
In chess parties under a flower arch and in moonlit guitar playing.
Alas! all that gaiety was nothing but forced gaiety.
To whom could she confide her heart? Who could understand her really?
She remained indifferent to all this courting and flirting, definitely.
Hundreds of sad thoughts filled her mind and made her feel so lonely.
Her heart was lacerated by both old and recent memories.
Her grief and sorrow became tangled as if they were crumpled. And she felt pangs in her heart as if it were pummeled.
She remembered the nine profound merits she owed her parents.
As time went by, they came closer to the evening of their existence.
Separated from her by mountains, water and thousands of miles,
How could they imagine that their child was in such a dolorous plight?
Her two siblings were still too young and inexperienced.
Who could replace her to prepare delicacies for her parents?
The love oaths exchanged with her erstwhile lover, she remembered.
So far from her, did he know all the grief and sorrow she suffered?
On his return, he would inquire about his lover, that spring branch;
Could he ever imagine it had been picked and passed from hand to hand?
She wanted to pay him for his love, profound and intense
And wondered whether the other flower had been grafted to that branch.
The skein of her sentiments got into an intricate tangle.
Dreams of her native place returned to her every night.
Far away from home, behind silk curtains, she lived a lonely life.
Golden sunset after golden sunset, she sighted.
Day after day, night after night,
Feeling sorry for her destiny of “Rent Entrails,” she cried.
Since she was bestowed that title of rosy cheeked beauty,
She had to endure extreme misery as compensation for the gift received.
Once condemned to a life of abominable misery,
She could not avoid being steeped, at least once, in infamy.
Among the clientele of the house there was a new customer.
His name was Ky Tam; he was one of the Thuc, a family of scholars.
Native of Thuong district, Tich country,
He followed his father to Lam Tri to open a business for the family.
Attracted by the celebrity of little Kieu’s famous beauty,
He sent a red card to the perfumed room to announce his visit.
Behind fringed curtains, he met that peach flower so exquisite.
To him, each and every manner of hers was so charming. Each and every delicate feature of hers was so appealing!
To a camellia resplendent with beauty and youth vigor,
Spring wind and rain only gave a better glamor.
Love scene after love scene! What a romantic sight!
Who could contain the heart and resist love in sweet spring nights?
No wonder about the infatuation between two persons of the same affinity.
Each day that went by bound them together more securely.
Morning date, evening date, they saw more frequently each other.
The frivolous love at first ripened into a love of stone and gold later
How extraordinary this happy coincidence sounded:
His father decided to make a long trip back to his hometown.
Young Thuc’s infatuation left him bemused and delighted at the same time
In springtime, his visits with the spring flower multiplied.
They enjoyed the fresh breeze upstairs, and the pleasure of contemplating the moon from the terrace, they shared.
Together they let themselves become sweetly inebriated by delicious wine. In a poetic frenzy, they took turn composing divine verses sometimes.
Sometimes, they burned incense in the morning to enjoy the aroma together, sometimes they drank tea together in the afternoon as true lovers
Playing chess or guitar duet, they spent their time together.
Immersed in love, they dashed off in pursuit of pleasure.
The more they knew each other, the more binding became their love.
Beauty had a destructive power, so surprising.
Its waves could easily sweep down palaces and buildings
It was young Thuc’s habit to spend money without counting.
In a pleasure party, he would spend hundreds even thousands like nothing.
The old woman doubled her care to enhance the belle’s charm and beauty.
The smell of money always attracted her because she was so greedy.
Rails already began announcing summer by their calls in moonlit nights
And at the wall, the flames of pomegranate blooms sparkled in daytime.
In her room, on a day of leisure, Kieu lowered
The pink curtains to take a bath in water perfumed with orchid flowers.
Jade pure, ivory white, her body appeared in its pristine beauty.
A perfect temple of love created by God the Almighty
The more Thuc looked at her lovely curves, the more he liked.
Inspired by admiration, a classic poem he improvised.
“I appreciate your nice sentiments for me,” said she.
“Each word was a pearl; each verse was an exquisite embroidery.
I should respond with a poem, no matter what my poetic talent may be.
Nostalgia, however, fills my heart with melancholy
And sailing with the clouds to my native place, seems to be my mind.
I owe you the responding poem for this time.”
He said, “Your discourse appears somewhat perplexing to me.
Are not you a branch of the owner’s family tree?”
Upon this question, the expression of her eyes became gloomy.
The facts of her “Rent Entrails” destiny made her feel so sorry.
She said, “A flower detached from a branch, I am like
And you are  hovering around, gamboling like a butterfly.
A lady has been definitely chosen as queen by now, the King of Spring.
Time was so short! Please, do not waste it by superfluous talking.”
He said, “Since the day we first knew each other,
I have been nurturing for you, deep down in my heart, an eternal love.
I intend to live with you as your husband for the rest of my life.
So, about your origin and family I should inquire.”
She replied, “Thank you a thousand times.
But I am afraid you have your own problem and I do have mine.
I have been living in this house of pleasure for a while.
You love the flower only for its brilliant fire.
But when the powder was tarnished and the perfume gone somehow,
Will your heart retain the same feelings it has now?
Furthermore, in the splendid moon palace, to my distress,
Reigns already the beautiful Hang Nga as mistress.
You have been bound together by hymeneal ties.
If you take me as your second-rank wife, the sentiments of your heart, I certainly divide.
I am nothing but a wandering cloud, a drifting duckweed!
How dare I cause whirlpools in the sea of your family bliss?
By marrying you, I would be the origin of your family disorders,
And God’s punishment for this sin, I would have to suffer?
If you were powerful enough in the family,
You would, of the protection I need, provide one or two tenth only.
In case your sway was less than your wife’s,
Place me in front of the lion’s mouth, you might.
I would stoop so I could live under your wife’s authority,
But the acid vinegar of jealousy would be three times worse than the intense heat of debauchery.
Above you, there still was your father as I can see.
I wonder if he would condescend to have pity on me
He would not care about a willow growing in an alley or a humble flower blooming over the wall, really.
Then from a house of debauchery I would return to debauchery.
And worse would be my sad plight and ignominy.
It will not matter much for me but consider your reputation and dignity.
I rely entirely on your love and generosity for me.
If your calculation can bring about conciliation, your order I will obey.”
He said, “Why that reserve so discreet?
Your heart knows my heart well enough, does not it?
Do not let yourself be trouble by imaginary difficulties.
For everything you can count on me.
Why that idea of separation when we were close together already?
I am determined to fight and brave thunderstorms when necessary.”
They kept talking and asking each other any question that did arise
They exchanged love oaths and decided to live as husband and wife.
Their sweet conversation went on, and too short seemed the night.
The moon started hiding behind the western mountain, outside
[By the excuse of an outdoor promenade]
He took her with him and temporarily hid her from public sight…
War or peace were the two plans for actions he devised.
Help from an influential personage, he acquired, and a man to probe the terrain on the enemy, he hired.
He made his intention known to Tu Ba by informal notification.
Outwitted, Tu Ba, of course, asked for the peaceful solution.
The ransom money for Kieu’s freedom was paid to her
And before the authorities she signed a release-to-honest-life paper.
So, everything was settled both amicably and officially,
And Kieu was freed from the prostitution world definitely
And under the same roof, she lived with Thuc as a happy family.
Deeper was their ocean of love and longer their river of tenderness.
Love scent grew sweeter and love flames became more ardent.
Her lotus complexion was more charming, her jade face more resplendent.
After half a year, they became familiar with voice and smell of each other.
In the front yard, dotted with yellow leaves, the foliage looked greener
And along the hedge, autumn mums started showing their white flowers.
Suddenly, on padded saddle, came back the old father.
Like a thunderstorm, broke loose his anger!
Worried about complications, he decided to separate the lovers
And made his decision known in a very clear manner:
The powder-faced girl had to be returned to the house of pleasure.
Before so categorical a paternal order,
Young Thuc summoned all his courage to entreat his father:
“I recognize my fault, I really do, daddy!
I am prepared to receive without complaining the punition reserved to me.
But my hands have been soaked in indigo, unfortunately.
[How could I be wise after such stupidity?]v
Although just for a short time I have been living with her in matrimony,
To smash the guitar I have been embracing, I will not have the cruelty.
If your indulgent heart was unmoved by my entreaties,
I reluctantly become undutiful and my life no longer matters to me.”
Upon these words that sounded as firm as could be,
The father, out of patience, instituted an action at law immediately
The tranquil life was perturbed by great waves of events, suddenly.
A summon for interrogation was issued by the authorities,
The couple had to follow a law enforcement man,
And they kneeled down in the court of the yamen.
Looking up they saw the black iron face of the mandarin
Who, to show his authority, started reprimanding,
“This young man here really was a playboy, corrupted and vicious.
And that girl was nothing but a loose woman, not virtuous.
She is not worth anything, that rejected perfume, that discarded flower!
She just tries to fool the innocent, utilizing lipstick and powder.
According to the plaintiff’s declaration,
Quite irregular in every aspect appears the situation.
Properly applied to this case, the law dictates two solutions.
The girl can take either one of her own volition:
She can either receive the punishment by law required,
Or accept to return to the house of pleasure for life.”
Kieu said, “I have made up my mind.
A spider never lives on its cobweb twice.
My life, pure or not, I accept it, and I am ready
To undergo the thunders of the law even though I am young and flimsy.
“Let the punishment be applied as required by law,” the mandarin said.
The wooden instrument of torture pressed hard on her body so delicate.
How could she complain about injustice when her choice was made?
Her peachy cheeks with tears were stained, her brows knit with pain.
In the yard a cloud of dust was rising; her face of flower was withering
And her body of jade appeared thinner because of suffering.
Young Thuc’s situation was truly deplorable.
He felt his entrails lacerated when witnessing the spectacle.
He lamented: “I cause all this suffering, I do really.
Had I listened to her, she would have avoided such an infamy
I lack profound thinking and such a development I could not foresee.
Now I let my beloved darling suffer from shame and misery.”
The lamenting was overheard by the mandarin
Who, quite moved, approached the young man, inquiring.
With a voice still affected by sobbing, young Thuc replied
By telling the whole story since the engagement night,
“She anticipated all possible eventualities somehow,
For a long time she knew what would happen to her now.
To protect her under any circumstance, I did vow.
 it was entirely my fault that she was in such a miserable plight now.”
That moving confidence touched the mandarin’s heart.
Dropping his unusual severity, he ordered a solution he found smart.
He said, “If such was the chain of events,
That girl, in spite of her ignoble origin, was not without good judgment.”
Young Thuc said, “Although of humble conditions,
She has some schooling and literary education.”
The mandarin said with a smile,
“If so, a poem about the cangue, let her improvise.”
She wrote the required poem, following the mandarin’s order
Then to the mandarin’s examination she submitted the floral paper.
He praised, “ it was definitely better than the poems of the Tang’s best.
This talent and that beauty! A thousand taels of gold, not less!
Yes, this distinguished man and that charming beauty
Make the best couple ever known to me.
Old man! Do not nurture either hatred or resentment.
Why, to this beautiful guitar duet, did you add a note so dissonant?
A case, when brought up to the authorities’ judgment
Is adjudicated overtly by law but inside, under the light of sentiments.
Are not daughter-in-law and son both members of your family?
Calm down your wrath and the case was settled definitively.
He immediately gave order for an official wedding that night.
Like wind, the flower decorated palanquin seemed to fly, and like stars the nuptial torches dotted the night.
Joyous wedding music welcomed the bride and groom,
Who were led to the pink curtained nuptial room.
Appreciating Kieu’s qualities and admiring the literary talent of hers,
Old Thuc stopped all his angry and acrid speeches and manners.
The house was filled with conjugal happiness.
After such a rueful distress, their love became more intense, not less
Enjoying wine and chess, they lost the notion of time
Peach blossoms were gone and the first green lotus leaves were sighted
In the conjugal room, on a quiet night,
Worried about the present situation, to him she confided,
“Since the day I, a humble woman, became your wife,
Wild geese replaced swallows in the sky, one year has almost gone by,
But you have not heard from your family for a long time,
And you seem to love your concubine more than your principal wife.
The more I think of it, the more I find it was worth our attention.
Who could protect us against possible indiscretions?
I have heard the woman, who governs your interior,
Is a person of principle in both language and behavior.
People above the ordinary, I always mind.
 it was easier to probe the ocean bottom than the riverbed sometimes.
For a whole year we have been living together
No matter how hard we try, we cannot keep the secret forever.
You have not received news from her for so long a time.
To me, something was going on, it looks like.
Prepare yourself to return home urgently.
First you will make her happy; then you’ll know the situation in the family.
If we continue to keep our situation under cover
By giving her no explanation, the situation can never be better.
After listening to this sincere and wise advice,
He took courage and decided to visit with his principal wife.
On the following morning he imparted his intention to his father,
Who also urged him to go back and see his wife the sooner, the better.
A valedictory dinner was given and farewell wine was sipped.
The household accompanied him to the first rest area of his trip.
The river was unfolding its bluish ribbon through the land.
On the bank, weeping willows were sadly undulating their branches.
Hand in hand, they look at each other and sighed.
Farewell cups stopped at their lips and words stopped at their windpipes.
Finally she said, “Mountains and rivers will separate us for a while.
The concubine may live in peace only when the wife was satisfied.
A red camisole may pass unnoticed but not the eye of the needle.
Trying to catch a bird when blindfolded is, of course, impossible.
The fact that we were united by matrimonial ties
Must be frankly brought up to your wife as soon as you arrive.
In case her anger break out notwithstanding all precautions,
Tell her I respect her authority and resign to my humble position.
This was better than concealing and dissimulating
With disastrous consequence, in the future arising.
If you love me, what I tell you today, please deep in mind.
One year was a long time but it will go by.
Let’s remember today when the valedictory cups we empty.
Let’s hope the same day next year, we’ll have a welcome home party.”
He vaulted onto his horse saddle unwillingly; she let go of his tunic reluctantly.
If you love me, what I tell you today, please deep in mind.
One year was a long time but it will go by.
Let’s remember today when the valedictory cups we empty.
Let’s hope the same day next year, we’ll have a welcome home party.”
He vaulted onto his horse saddle unwillingly;
She let go of his tunic reluctantly.
The disk of the moon in two, who divided?
Half sent its rays to her solitary pillow, and half lit his way at night.
Instead of relating Thuc’s journey incidents.
Let’s talk about his wife’s and sentiments.
Of the illustrious Hoan family, she was a descendant.
Her name was Thu, and her father was a minister in the royal government.
Born with a silver spoon in her mouth, she had a happy life.
And had been married to Thuc for quite a while.
She had good behavior and manners as any noble lady,
But she excelled in accusing people when necessary.
Since she heard about her husband taking a concubine,
Many rumors were going on, but of him, no sign.
The more she tried to smother jealousy, the more ardent its fires became.
Her unfaithful husband, for his fickle heart, she blamed,
“Had he frankly confessed to me the truth about her
I would have accepted her to show my complaisance to inferiors.
I am not foolish enough not to observe family traditions,
And being a jealous wife, of course, was not a good reputation.
But he continues that game of concealment and dissimulation!
Why that childish behavior that causes cachinnation?
They undoubtedly count on the fact that I am out of sight
To hide the truth from me, Well, I will do the same but in my own style.
There was nothing to worry about this affair;
An ant crawling on the rim of a cup can not get anywhere!
I will make them unable to look at each other,
I will humiliate her to the point she must look down in front of others.
I will make him witness all the humiliation she will suffer
To show him how I treat a man who sells his boat before getting lumber.”
Her secret was kept so well that nothing of it transpired.
Rumors and gossip, she appeared not to mind.
Ten days later, two persons dropped by
And informed her of the news; undoubtedly to get a reward, they tried.
She flew into a tantrum, quite stormy,
“How horrible were those people who weave scandalous calumnies!
My husband was absolutely not like others.
All of this was nothing but the deed of scandalmongers!”
Immediately, the order for severe punishment, she shouted
One was slapped in the mouth, the other had her teeth pulled out.
From that time on all mouths were kept shut, both inside and outside.
No one dared say a word about her husband taking a concubine.
She kept herself composed and natural in her chamber.
In daily activities she talked and laughed as if nothing had occurred,
But inside her, anger was roaring at the perjured heart, day and night.
Young Thuc arrived and dismounted at the villa during that time.
Health inquiries were followed by the joy of reunion after a long absence.
Their union appeared harmonious and their love intense.
They gaily sipped good wine in a welcome home party,
But the sentiments at the bottom of their hearts, no one knew, really.
He came home to probe his wife’s state of mind, and very hard he was trying
To find the opportunity of glossing over the present state of things.
But, whether inebriated or lucid, in their sprightly conversation,
She never made the faintest allusion to the situation.
He thought, “Keeping that secret was really my great success.
There was no interrogation! Why do I have to confess?”
He was wallowing in indecision and hesitation,
Afraid that by pulling the liana he might cause the forest commotion.
One time she said, to enliven their intimate conversation,
[She would utter ambiguous discussion.]vi
“Between jade and stone, brass and gold, we ‘ve made the distinction,
And our confidence in each other has grown to perfection.
I despise the brazen tongues of those rascals who imprudently
Fabricate all that imaginary love affair story.
Had I Had no good discernment and judicious thoughts,
I would have debased my heart and exposed myself to public scorn.”
She made the remark in an indifferent tone and playful manner
He found he would better cover himself by speaking in agreement with her.
They laughed merrily when he teased her at her make-up time.
They spent their evening under the lamp or the full moon, side by side.
With pleasure, he gave himself up to the simple rustic life,
But around the water well a few yellow plane tree leaves met his sight.
This reminded him of the beautiful scenery of yonder
That land had in autumn, the same color but had witnessed his passionate love for her.
About his secret sentiment he dared not utter a word yet
When his wife seemed to have read his mind and said,
“Since you left your father, a full year has passed somehow.
You should think about return to Lam Tri to look after him now.”
His wife’s statement loosened the pressure off his mind
He departed at full gallop and on alien land traveled long miles.
Glistening were the water surfaces and imprinted at the bottom was the sky.
At the horizon, he saw over the ramparts, blue smoke rise and mountains take a bath in moonlight.
As soon as the cavalier started flogging his horse for his long trip,
His wife got on her perfumed cart and went to her parents’ for a visit.
Upon arrival, she exposed the whole situation to her mother:
How her husband had cheated on her and how much she suffered.
She said, “Itching by scabies was as bad as the scandal of jealousy;
I would have made him lose face for no praise if I had acted overtly.
So, I have averted my eyes and kept silent for a long time.
However, I have contrived a profound stratagem for a while.
It would take a good month to go to Lam Tri by land,
But by sea, it would be much less, shorter being the distance.
I have prepared a boat and selected men good at traveling by sea.
Let them sail there and bring her with feet tied up to me.
I must make her suffer until she was immersed in lethargy,
I must make her endure the harrowing pangs of infamy,
First to ease my hatred for those despicable people
Then to leave to posterity an anecdote so laughable.”
The old lady lauded her daughter for her excellent stratagem
And with complaisance she gave her permission to implement.
With good sails and halyards, the boat was rigged.
Mastiff and Falcon recruited a gang of scoundrels, tall and big.
Clear instructions were given to them for each possible circumstance.
With a favorable wind, the boat arrived at harbor with no incident.
Kieu was living in solitude, behind silk curtains.
Her sad heart was harrowed by memories both past and recent.
“My parents have now come to the evening of their lives
Are they now comfortable? Do they have their favored dishes at mealtime?
The section of my hair I cut for my love oath was now reaching my shoulders.
Alas! Now become perjury, vow and promise exchanged with my lover!”
I am now reduced to the humble conditions of a concubine
Yet I do not know if this can continue for a long time.
Why so many injustices have accumulated on my head?
I  would rather, like Hang Nga in the Moon Palace, live alone instead.”
A breeze was slipping through her pink window curtains one night,
And the last moon quarter was hanging in the star-studded sky.
She stepped out and lighted a few incense sticks at Heaven’s altar.
She was unloading her sad heart in a long prayer
When from behind the flowers loomed a gang of ferocious offenders,
Creating an uproar infernal enough to terrify devils, much less her.
The yard was illuminated with the sparkling of unsheathed sabers.
Stunned and confused, she did not know what was going on around her
Immediately, she was administered a good dose of anesthesia,
Which rapidly plunged her in a deep coma.
She was put on horseback in no time.
From her room and his study flames rose high.
By chance, an unwanted corpse on the river bank was found,
And as replacement for Kieu, it was thrown into the burning house.
Maid and servants, panic stricken and mystified
Ran out, and behind bushes and trees, they tried to hide.
Old Thuc who, in the same neighborhood was living,
Was scared to death when seeing the flames from his son’s house rising.
As fast as they could, master and servants ran to the scene.
They tried to water down the fire and search for the victims.
As the wind grew stronger, the flames rose higher and higher.
All the servants were accounted for, but Kieu, they could not find.
Haggard and panting, they looked at one another and around.
The search continued in water wells and bushes around the house.
They came to the place that used to be the conjugal chamber,
And found among the ashes a heap of bones burned to cinders.
Bona fide, how could they suspect it was an odious sell;
They all believed it was her remains, no one else’s
The old man was sobbing for a long time.
Over his son’s absence and the death of a woman of merit, he cried.
He has the bones gathered and brought to his house, then proceeded
To the coffining and necessary preparations for the funeral service.
When everything had been accomplished according to usual rites,
Young Thuc at the end of his long trip by land, arrived.
He came to his father’s place where their apartments and his study had been,
But only ashes, cinders and four weather beaten bare walls were seen.
Coming to his father’s home, he saw in the middle of the house
A memorial plaque bearing her name, on a funeral altar mounted.
Alas! In front of the altar, he told all the memories of their love.
Her memories rent his entrails and suffering burned his liver.
He thrashed about on the ground, crying, lamenting louder and louder,
“So good a person! Why this cruel and unjust death happened to her?
She and I firmly believed we would enjoy a harmonious reunion.
Who could think of the valedictory day as the day of eternal separation?”
Regrets revived memories, memories invited distress!
How could his grief and sorrows be relieved or suppressed?
He learned about a necromancer in the vicinity
With exorcizing power and ability to penetrate any mystery.
Whether the spirits were down in Hell or up in Paradise,
The wizard could find them and gather the information required.
Young Thuc acquired offerings and earnestly
Asked the wizard to find her spirit for inquiries.
Before the Altar of Silence, the necromancer kowtowed
Then got into a trance for about a quarter of an hour.
When coming back to himself, he made a startling declaration,
“I did not see her there, but for her case I have an explanation,
This person still has a heavy karma to accomplish
With so many unpaid debts, how could she, with this life be finished?
Then got into a trance for about a quarter of an hour.
When coming back to himself, he made a startling declaration,
“I did not see her there, 
But for her case I have an explanation,
This person still has a heavy karma to accomplish
With so many unpaid debts, how could she, with this life be finished?
How could he believe in a necromancer, all things considered?
Just medium’s raving and irrational maundering!
How could a dead person ever be seen in this world of the living?
Over his broken love he lamented and over the destroyed flower he cried.
In his lifetime, how could a man expect to encounter a fairy twice?
The tragic death of the beauty fell into oblivion somehow
But the presence of Hell in this world of human beings, who would doubt?
Mastiff and Falcon, having succeeded in the plot so perfidious,
To the boat, carried Kieu still unconscious.
In full sails and taut rigging, the ship proceeded
In the direction of Tich district at full speed.
They hurried to the palace upon disembarkation
And delivered Kieu for a sizeable appreciation.
She was carried to a room in the outbuilding
Where she continued her long and profound sleeping. 
When roused from her dream-laden slumbers,
“Where was my home? What place was this?” She wondered.
When she still was in a half-somnolent state,
An order resounded, urgently demanding her to report to the palace.
Maids at once rushed in and pushed her to comply.
She followed one of them, mystified and terrified.
An imposing palace with large rooms and long halls met her amazed sight.
On the façade, saying “Prime Minister” was a huge sign.
Two rows of wax candles, in broad daylight were burning,
In a bed sofa inlaid with gold and mother of pearl, a lady was sitting.
Bombarded with an avalanche of scouring and pressing questions,
Kieu had to tell her story with all the details without exception.
The lady suddenly got into a fit of ire,
“Species of adventurers and libertines!
This was definitely not an honest girl free of vice.
If not a fugitive servant, she must be an adulterous wife.
A wandering hen in the fields, a stray pussy cat in the cemetery,
A roaming outlaw, that’s what she appears to be.
You! as a slave, you have been sold to me
Yet you still play the proud irrelevantly!
Well, where were those in charge of punition?
Give her a thirty-stroke thrashing to teach her a lesson.”
“Yes, Madam!” went the chorus of the servants all around.
Kieu could not utter a single word even if she had a hundred mouths.
Forcefully executed with a bamboo rod was the thrashing.
Any flesh would by lacerated! Any courage would be flinching!
Pity for the delicate peach branch
That by a severe thunderstorm was mangled!
Order was given to change her name to “Slave Flower”
And to make her work as a maid serving the palace chambers.
With other blue liveried servants she worked until exhaustion,
Not minding her backbreaking chores, disheveled hair and pale complexion.
In the palace there was an old governess, who in appreciation
Of her beauty and good character, on her took compassion.
The old woman gave her now a cup of tea, now some medication,
Now some joie de vivre  through a few words of consolation,
“I agree that nobody can avoid bad luck,” said she,
“Try to take care of your health and delicate body.
You were undoubtedly paying for the mistakes in your previous life.
You must have been ensnared, considering your unusual plight.
Here walls have ears and partitions have eyes.
Should you ever see any old acquaintance, do not try to recognize
Or thunder would fall upon you otherwise.
A humble ant as you are, how could you be against injustice cry!”
Upon these words, Kieu’s tears started running down profusely.
Secret sentiments and premonitions tortured her terribly.
“Destiny has drawn me once into a mishap very sad
But this time, my misfortune was twice as bad.
I never thought my fate would be so gloomy!
And why does it persist in hounding me, a rosy-cheeked lady?
That was the consequence of my previous debts and mistakes.
Anyway I must resign to my fate of withered flower and broken jade!”
Kieu did her best to subsist while waiting for time to become better
When Hoan Thu arrived, visiting with her mother.
Daughter and mother were engaged in a rambling conversation
When the old lady called Kieu in for special instruction.
“Madame needs personnel at her place,” she said.
“You will go there to wait upon her in the capacity of a room maid.”
Obeying the order, Kieu followed Hoan Thu not knowing
Whether for her, Hell or Paradise would be waiting.
From morn till eve she attended to every toilet need of her new mistress
Being a soubrette, she never failed the duties of a soubrette.
One evening, when calm and serene was the sky,
About her musical talent, the mistress inquired.
Obeying the behest, Kieu tuned the strings of her guitar.
Like susurrus confidences, the notes poured out their bewitching charisma
The mistress was impressed by that musical virtuosity somehow,
And the usual severity of her countenance was partly toned down.
Thus in that alien house, Kieu continued her slave life,
Relying on her own shadow for companionship in daytime and suffering from the pangs of her poor heart in solitude at night.
She thought of that sweet conjugal union at Lam Tri, by love woven,
But lost all hope of renewing it except in the next existence.
All around, the skyline was covered with white clouds.
She looked in the direction of her hometown but where was her house?
Slowly, days passed and months went by
To Kieu’s tragedy how could young Thuc be alive when in distress he was confined?
At Lam Tri, since the mandarin duck had flown away to the sky,
In his empty room, he had been living a solitary life.
The moon crescent painfully reminded him of her eyebrows,
Cruelly lacerating his heart were the remnants of perfume and face powder.
Mums started blooming after the lotus flowers had withered;
Days became shorter but his sadness was longer. Spring was already here, replacing sad winter.
Where could he find again his heart’s companion?
He blamed fate just to alleviate the pains of his love passion.
Nostalgia began harassing his mind.
Homesick he decided to leave and go back to his wife.
At the door she greeted him with apparent extasy;
Her welcome was warm and her inquiries were effusive.
From her perfumed room, behind lifted curtain, she ordered
Poor Kieu to come out and salute the master.
With hesitating steps, Kieu moved slowly.
From a distance she already saw the scene clearly.
“Am I blinded by the sun or dazzled by the lamplight?
Is it really my beloved Thuc, that man sitting there by her side?
Now everything was exposed to broad daylight!
We were certainly caught in her trap! O, God of mine!
What a dirty trick? What an unusual wife?
What a diabolic woman, capable of so devilish a strike!
We were now face to face in the same chamber
But because of her, I became his slave and he, my master!
Outside she was sweet, all nice words and smiles,
But inside she was a snake, capable of killing without a knife.
Now the distance between him and me was that between earth and sky!
What would I do? What should I say at this point in time?”
The more she looked at him, the more she became mystified.
And a skein of tangled silk thread, her entrails was like.
The mistress’ authority considered, how could she not obey the order?
She kowtowed obediently then crouched in a corner.
Young Thuc became dumbfounded, losing all spirit. Thought he,
“Is this really my poor Kieu? What a pity!
What happened to her? How could she fall into such a terrible plight?
That’s it! We were caught in a trap! But who was the mastermind?”
He dared not openly recognize her nor was he bold enough to utter a sound.
His face was steaming with tears and his sobs he could not gulp down!
Looking straight in his face, she pretended to inquire about his sadness,
“You are just back! What upsets you? What causes your distress?
He said, “I have just finished my period of mourning
The memories of mother cause my eternal suffering.”
She exclaimed, “Your filial piety was truly admirable! But tonight,
To wash away sorrow and grief, let me offer you welcome-home wine.”
They emptied cup after cup, husband and wife.
Kieu was compelled to stand by and serve them wine,
Fast or slow, depending on the whimsical mood of the wife.
To kneel down while putting the cup in their hands, she was obliged.
He was dumbfounded and with shame brutalized.
With his own tears, he mixed the offered wine.
Averting his eyes from Kieu, he talked at random, laughed gratuitously.
Finally, he asked to withdraw under the pretext of inebriety.
“Slave flower!” The mistress burst into anger, warning,
“Should you fail to make him empty his cup, you’ll face thrashing!”
Painfully lacerated were his entrails, broken in pieces was his mind.
He immediately emptied the cup offered, trying to gulp down the rueful wine.
Inebriated but with lucid intervals, the mistress was talking, laughing.
She invented another game right after the drink offering.
She said, “Flower slave’s many talents reach perfection
Let her play a tune on the guitar for your appreciation.”
Dismayed and paralyzed with suffering,
Kieu obeyed, sat down at the silk screen and did the guitar tuning.
The four strings then started moaning and sobbing,
Braking the heart of the man who was feasting.
The same tune played on silk chords late in the night
Made one person smile triumphantly while the other two secretly cried.
Unable to keep back his tears pf bitterness,
He lowered his head to wipe them off with furtiveness.
Shouted again the mistress,
“How dare you play such a poignant tune full of distress?
Why do you act so foolishly? If Monsieur was afflicted
By your music, you are  the culprit and shall be convicted.”
Worse became his grief and embarrassment.
He forced himself to laugh and talk, trying to minimize the incident.
The dragon-shaped water clock marked the third watch already.
Hoan Thu’s visage showed she was satisfied completely.
Her heart leaped with joy and she said to herself,
“Good compensation for all the secret pains I have suffered myself.”
Thuc felt his heart faltering and his bowel in disorder.
The more he thought, the more ruefully he suffered.
Husband and wife withdrew to share the bed in the conjugal chamber.
Kieu, alone by the lamp, sat out the night to ponder,
“Things were now clear and I can put together all the pieces.
What kind of jealousy was this? Truly extraordinary indeed!
So, she succeeded in breaking us in the cruelest manner!
Put in two completely different levels, we dare not recognize each other
Now I am in the chasm and she was in the sky so high!
Her disparaging and disdainful remarks torture my mind.
Her treatment of me was rude and heavy though it appears to be light.
What would be left of our love if I could ever get out of this plight?
As a young woman lost to a disastrous destiny,
I wonder if I could ever, safe and sound, get out of this sea of frenzy.”
In solitude and late in the nigh, she grieved and suffered.
As oil in the lamp ran lower and lower, her eyes, with tears of distress became fuller and fuller.
She continued working in the palace day and night without interruption.
One day, Hoan Thu coming across her, asked searching questions.
Weighing her words carefully, Kieu answered evasively,
“I just happen, Madam, to feel pity for my own sad destiny.”
The mistress then came to her husband and asked earnestly,
“My dear! Please question her. I rely on you to elicit this mystery.”
Thuc felt sharp twinges in his entrails upon the request of his wife.
To interrogate Kieu was hard, but it was cruel to let her be victimized.
For fear another calamity could fall upon her during the interrogation,
He summoned his courage and asked her a few carefully-worded questions.
Kieu knelt down on the floor and with a bow,
Presented to him a brief written account.
The paper was on the spot, given to the mistress,
Who, after reading it, appeared to be touched by the story’s sadness.
She gave it back to Thuc and said with leniency
“Her talent deserves respect and her misfortunes, much mercy.
Had she been born under a lucky star,
She would have been living in a jade and gold villa.
Tossed about by the billows of the ocean of suffering, she now is!
Such a talented person brutalized by bad luck! What a pity!”
“Alas! It was absolutely true!” Thuc agree.
“This was a typical example of the rosy cheeked ladies
Suffering since antiquity from cruel destiny!
For mercy’s sake, let’s treat her more gently.”
“The content of her written account reveals,” said she
That she would like to put under Buddha’s protection her sad life.
Let it be so! I am inclined to gratify her desire
To release her from the bad luck cycle.
We have a temple dedicated to Kuan In at our park site
Where grow flowers for all seasons and a tree one hundred cubits high.
Also, there were secular trees, a rock garden and a pond full of water.
Let her guard the temple and practice the psalmody of prayers.”
The following day, when the morning was just dawning,
With incense and flowers included in the ritual five offerings,
Kieu was led to the Buddha’s altar for religious conversion.
After taking the oath of the Triple Refuge and Five Prohibitions,
She took off the blue livery and donned the Buddhist cloak of redemption.
Trac Tuyen was her new name to befit her religious position.
Adequacy was insured for incense and oil supplies,
And for cult service, two servants to the temple were assigned.
Since she took religious refuge in the park full of flowers,
To Kouan In’s mercifulness , she seemed to be closer and closer, and from vain worldly affairs, she appeared to be farther and farther.
She stopped hoping for her love, already reduced to fragments.
At least she did not feel ashamed of her beauty for working as a servant.
With Buddha’s blessing, she buried grieves and sorrows, spending time
In hand copying sacred psalms in day time and worshiping Buddha in her heart at night.
Sprinkled from a twig of laurel, the holy water
Extinguished the fire of passion that to worldly affairs linked her.
Since she assumed the brown robe for the religious life,
The autumnal garden had witnessed two full moons in the sky.
Doors were carefully bolted and the surveillance not was extremely tight.
In front of others she talked naturally, but alone she cried and cried.
Thuc could see the oratory from his book chamber,
But that short distance separated them more than mountains and rivers.
He tried hard to repress tears and hold back sighs.
One day, his wife went to her parents’ palace and he was delighted.
Seizing the opportunity, he stealthily left the house
And with quick steps, for the park he was bound.
With tears, he told her about his ruefulness,
Soaking the pan of his blue tunic with profuse tears of distress,
“O, my love! I have betrayed you! That’s true!” Said he.
“Master of the gynaeceum, yet I let you bear alone all the adversity!
Stupid enough, I let myself defeated by a woman’s malicious intelligence!
With a rent heart, I had to witness your martyrdom in silence.
Because of me, you have to suffer so cruelly!
In the dirty sand you are  fallen and your youth was lost miserably.
To brave dangerous falls and rapids, I have decided.
To live and to die for my love, I have made up my mind.
But all this, my filial duties prevent,
And I have to break our union while my teeth I clench.
I feel ashamed for having to break my solemn love oath now.
Even for hundred existences, I could not redeem a broken vow.”
“I am but a fragile skiff on a rough sea of hazards,” said she,
“Floating and sinking at the billow’s mercy.
Wallowing painfully in the sinking quagmire,
I never thought until today that I would survive.
To the sad fate of a drop of rain , I resign,
Offering to the public the pathetic scene of my life,
But the thought of our love union still boggles my mind.
It did not last for a life time but still for a while,
Four our love’s sake, try to get me out of here soon
This was a great favor you can do for me and I will be profoundly grateful.”
He said, “I have been thinking of this for a while
But her intention was unfathomable and her heart vile.
A violent storm could break any time,
Catastrophic for you and much more painful for my heart and mind.
Flee as far as possible, fly as high as you can! Please, try!
Our love, alas! has too brief a life.
You’ll follow your predestined road and I will have to go along mine.
When could we ever renew the ties that unite our bodies and minds?
Stone may wear down, river may run dry,
But true lovers were always attached to their love ties, exactly as silkworms were attached to their silk for life.”
They called to mind memories, past and recent,
Chatting endlessly, pouring out their hearts’ contents.
Hand in hand, they looked amorously at each other.
Suddenly they heard from afar the voice of Flower.
Swallowing down their pains, they separated furtively.
But Hoan Thu, brushing aside flowers, approach them already.
She laughed and talked, using blandishments lavishly.
Asked she, “What brought you here, Honey?”
Thuc answered by lying clumsily,
“I was picking flowers, when by chance, I came to this area and just stopped by to see the nun, hand copying sutras.”
She exclaimed, “Truly, she has mastered the art of calligraphy
And could be, of course, compared to Lan Dinh favorably.
It was a pity that she was condemned to a life of adventures and exile!
Such a talent, a thousand taels of gold would be a good price.
They drank some tea with apricot aroma
Then with a leisurely pace returned to their villa.
Woebegone and overwhelmed with fright,
Kieu approached Flower and about the incident softly inquired.
Flower said, “Madam was there for a long time.
She came in silence and hid in a corner for a good while;
She heard every word of yours. No details escaped her attention.
Your conversation gave her a thorough comprehension.
She knew everything: your misfortunes, your profound love,
Your moan and groan and the laments of the master.
She ordered me not to move and to avert my eyes.
She came up here only when her ears had been fully satisfied.
Flower’s detailed account left Kieu dumfounded and terrified,
“Another woman like her, it was impossible to find!
What a self-control! What an odd personality!
The more I think of her, the more I feel scary!
With a superior slyness and craftiness of such a woman,
No wonder my poor Thuc became so helpless and impotent.
She caught us in the act! That’s true, absolutely!
Another woman would have frowned and gnashed her teeth from jealousy,
But unfazed she was and no scene she made!
She greeted her husband cheerfully and sweet things she said.
Losing her temper would have been a natural reaction, quite ordinary;
But she smiled instead, and meaning she was quite dangerous and crafty.
I must take care of my own safety.
Here, tiger’s fangs and snake venom always lie in wait for me.
Should I not try soon to take flight,
After these preparations, she would be ready to strike.
I have been thrown in troubled water; why should I, a duckweed mind?
Here or elsewhere, I am always tossed by the billows, whatever I may try.
But one thing scares me: alone, on alien land,
How could I acquire food and shelter with empty hands?”
Her thought went round and round in her mind
When the gold and silver curios on Buddha’s altar caught her sight.
She took them, intending to use them as security.
The guard’s drum sounded the third watch already.
Over the wall surrounding the flower garden, she climbed
And went westward in the direction of the moon in decline.
I the fog, sandy road and tree hills were blurred.
Roosters were crowing under the moonlit guard towers; Kieu’s foot prints were visible on bridges with dew covered.
A woman, walking long miles late in the night, lonely!
The long road and inclement weather scared her terribly.
The break of dawn appeared resplendent over the mulberry plantation,
But she was still wandering with no definite destination.
Suddenly, she saw a Buddhist temple from afar,
Then the inscription “Blissful Refuge Temple” on the portal of the pagoda.
Straight there she went and knocking at the door she tried.
A bonzess answered the door and invited her to come inside.
Seeing Kieu in a brown robe of the Buddhist religion,
Bonzess Superior Giac Duyen treated her with affection
And asked several questions about her origin and situation.
Before a stranger, Kieu made up a story to perfection,
“I am a native of Peking but have left home for redemption
And have since been in holy orders to redeem my sins and imperfections.
My superioress, who will come here later on,
Instructed me to bring some cult objects to you in person.
I am honored to present them to you on her behalf.”
She took out a gold bell and a silver gong from her bag.
After a perfunctory inspection, said the bonzess,
“These were no doubt from my closest friend Hang Thuy, your superioress.
I am concerned about your safety on your long way back.”
Please stay here for a few days until my friend comes,” she added.
Thus Kieu found a safe haven in the temple for this time.
Living on a vegetarian diet, she let days and months peacefully go by.
She knew by heart psalms and sutras
The cult service and routine cleaning to her, were familiar.
She spent the day in hand copying the teachings of Buddha, in the morning she raised the pagoda banner and lowered it at twilight;
She sounded dew time on the gong and lighted the lamp at moon rise.
She was admired for her superior education and intelligence.
More and more she was esteemed, more and more she felt safe and confident.
With spring on the wane, the ground was strewn with flowers and at night,
The Milky Way looked like a luminous sash in the sky.
On a cloudless serene day when the wing was gentle and mild,
A pious frequenter of the temple happened to drop by.
After examining the precious bell and gong shown to her with pride,
The visitor exclaimed, “Those of Madam Hoan, these just look like!”
The spontaneous remark worried the bonzess.
That night she questioned Kieu, creating much stress.
Knowing that her secrets could no longer be kept,
Kieu told the Superioress all her adventures and misfortunes, then added,
“Now things for me have taken another direction;
I put my humble fate in your good hands and appeal to your compassion.”
Upon these words, Giac Duyen became terrified;
Divided between commiseration and fear, she remained undecided.
Finally she whispered to Kieu some sincere advice:
“This was the house of Buddha, open to all human lives;
However, I am afraid a sudden calamity will strike.
It would be very painful for me to let you fall into another sad plight.
Think now of a way to flee far from here. Time was not on your side.
Do not wait until the flood comes to your feet to take flight.”
Not far from the temple, there lived Bac Ha, a devout woman
Who came to bring oil and incense very often.
Giac Duyen sent for her and earnestly recommended Kieu to her
Then asked her to make arrangements to give Kieu board and shelter.
Kieu, delighted to have a new sanctuary,
Could not weigh the pros and cons in such a hurry,
Nor did she ever suspect her new refuge was a nest of panders.
Bac Ba was trained in the same trade school as Tu Ba. No wonder
Noticing Kieu’s pristine charm and beauty,
She secretly exulted over this profitable opportunity.
She made up abominable stories so many times,
And poor Kieu was more than once terrified and mystified.
Taking advantage of the situation, she tried harder to track Kieu down.
With threatening words she coerced Kieu to marriage somehow.
She said, “You were alone here, away from home, thousands of miles,
And your rather bad reputation was spreading far and wide.
You belong to that cursed species that brings misfortune to others.
I do not think anyone was brave enough to give you board and shelter.
Hurry up and get a husband for support and protection.
Alone in case of misfortune, even if you could fly, no possible evasion!
Around her, I see no good match;
Far from here there is not any decent catch.
But my nephew Bac Hanh was quite eligible.
A close relative of mine, no stranger at all,
He owns a business in the district of Thai.
His honesty was beyond comparison and he never lies.
No matter what, you must listen to me, darling!
You’ll move to Thai district after the wedding.
There, no one knows you, and you’ll be absolutely free
As if you were on a large river or vast sea.
Do not fail to comply with this request of mine!
If you disobey me now, calamity will certainly strike!”
Kieu listened with a deep frown on her gloomy visage.
Each word was a violent lash at her face
She knew she was misled to another desperate plight.
Driven to the wall, she could do nothing but cry.
She said, “I am like a swallow wounded by an arrow,
Afraid of any curved branch, which reminds me of the deadly bow.
Suppose at this dead end, marriage was the only solution to my problem,
I should know not only the man’s face but also his heart’s sentiments.
In the future, should a misfortune swoop down on me,
How could I, in this trade of tigers and wolves, insure my safety?
Let the man who wants to marry me,
With a sincere heart, take with me the solemn oath of matrimony
Before the witness of both Earth and Heaven.
If so, I will not mind sailing with him on the vast ocean.”
With Kieu’s consent, Bac Ba took no time to inform the family
And preparations for the wedding were made in a hurry.
The house received the decoration of festival days,
Before the witness of both Earth and Heaven.
If so, I will not mind sailing with him on the vast ocean.”
With Kieu’s consent, Bac Ba took no time to inform the family
And preparations for the wedding were made in a hurry.
The house received the decoration of festival days,
The Bac’s cleaned the court yard, installed the altar and lit the incense after carefully cleaning the flower vase.
Young Bac in great haste kneeled down,
Invoked irrelevantly a jumble of gods and genies in his vow.
After taking the oath of matrimony outside,
He withdrew behind the curtain to accomplish the hymeneal rites
After the wedding, they were accompanied to the boat, husband and wife,
And before the wind, they sailed, bound for the district of Thai.
As soon as the boat was moored alongside the quay,
Young Bac left the boat for his familiar quarter, stealthily.
He went to the same parlor with the same pimps,
Selling human flesh and trafficking in women.
They went to see the girl and discussed the price;
Obtaining ten times his cost, the seller let go the merchandise.
A rental sedan chair delivered Kieu to the person willing to pay,
And Bac, the infamous, with his infamous face slipped away.
The sedan chair stopped in front of a veranda quite flowery.
A woman from the house came out in a hurry
And led Kieu directly to the altar of the family.
It was the same type of pleasure house, the same white-browed genie.
Kieu understood the situation at first sight,
But how could a caged bird fly high?
“Cursed be the lot of a peach flower!” Exclaimed she.
“The grip of destiny loosens then tightens on me whimsically.
I am immersed in distress when thinking of my life!
Do my gifts and talents make Heaven and Earth green eyed?
Water clarified by alum becomes again muddy
Because dregs and dust come up again. What a pity!
O, Creator! You keep hounding a frail woman like me! May I ask why?
You tossed me from reef to reef yet you are  not satisfied.
I knew I was misled when out of my house I stepped,
And I have resigned to my fate since my home I left.
How could I commit any crime in my green days, considering my innocence?
Over half of my prime was gone yet still hounding me was the punishment!
I know I cannot escape Heaven’s ire
So, to my spring days, I do not mind saying goodbye.
Time went by and autumn was here, the breeze was cool and the moon bright.
One day, a man from the far away frontier happened to come by.
Prominent jaws, thick and slanted eyebrows, beard of a tiger,
King-size stature and extra broad shoulders,
He was built like a hero in popular legends.
In marital arts, military tactics and strategy, he was excellent.
He proudly trampled the ground, having nobody above him but the sky.
He was a descendant of the Tu Family of Viet Dong, and his name was Hai.
He enjoyed a life of freedom and adventures,
With a sword and a guitar, he crossed mountains and rivers.
During his short stay in the area, he heard about Kieu’s celebrity.
A hero’s heart was often won by a woman’s captivating charm and beauty.
He sent his card to Kieu at the pink pavilion.
They ogled each other, their heart beat in unison.
Tu said, “By affinity we meet each other.
This was not a brief encounter for frivolous love
Of your beautiful renown I have heard for a while.
Is it true that you have not admitted any man into your blue eyes?
Noble-hearted heroes one meets in a life time were not many.
Those fish in bowls, birds in cages are not worth keeping company.”
She said, “My lord, I do appreciate your benevolence,
But with my conditions, how dare I treat anyone with disparagement?
In my innermost heart, I intend to use touchstone to test gold,
But I have not found any man I could entrust with my soul.
For those who by chance enter here then leave after a short while,
To single out gold from brass, of course, I am not authorized.”
“Your words were full of charm,” said he.
“Of the verses about Binh Nguyen Quan, they remind me.
Come here! so you may have a close look and see
Whether to some extent you can trust me.”
“Should your noble heart accept me,” said she,
Someday, the union of the dragon and the clouds I would see
“Should you deign to have pity on me, a humble flower in the prairie,
I would implore your protection for my ignoble destiny.”
Tu Hai, satisfied with these words, nodded and smiled,
“In this life, a friend that really understands you was hard to fine.
I admire your clairvoyance, which was so extraordinary.
You can single out a hero from the multitude! That’s perspicacity!
Your words prove that you have truly recognized me.
I will stay with you even if I have a thousand war chariots and rice aplenty”
Their minds and spirits were in perfect unison;
It did not require much, their spontaneous infatuation.
Wedding arrangements were made by a matchmaker.
A few hundred ounces of gold were paid to the bordello owner,
And they built their love nest in a quiet quarter.
A deluxe bed and embroidered curtains were included in the furniture.
The husband was a noble-hearted hero, the wife a fascinating beauty.
The dragon married to the phoenix! What an ideal family!
Six months went by. Still ardent was the flame of their love,
But the hero’s heart was suddenly excited by the appeal of adventures.
His eyes scanned the high sky then the immense sea;
He took his sword, mounted his horse, ready to leave.
She said, “A wife must follow her husband wherever he might be.
You were leaving, my lord! So, I am going with you definitely.”
Tu said, “Our hearts do understand each other perfectly,
Why can not you free yourself from the feminine attachment and loyalty?
When I have one hundred thousand well trained men, I will come back,
Quaking the earth with loud speakers and shading roads with flags.
Only when people recognize my extraordinary prominence
Will I pick you up and, in great pomp, bring you to my residence.
I have no permanent abode on this planet at this point in time,
Following me, you only bother me when I have no destination in mind.
For me, please wait here for a short while.
Be patient, within a year at the latest, I will be by your side.
He departed, snatching the flap of his tunic out of her hand.
With the wind, the eagle soared into space, devouring large expanses;
She stayed behind, solitary at her window, opening on an apricot tree.
In the solitude of her locked room, interminable her nights seemed to be.
On the moss in the courtyard foot prints were not seen any longer,
Grass grew higher and willow trees somewhat thinner.
She thought of her far away native village with its elms and catalpas,
And her nostalgic soul sailed with the clouds from afar.
“My poor parents! Now bent under the weight of old age they must be.
I wonder whether time has somewhat healed their missing me.
Since I left home, more than ten years have gone by! Time did fly!
White must be their hair and wrinkled their skin if they’re still alive.
I ruefully regret my first love that has been making me cry.
The lotus stem has been broken but sentimental ties still bind!
If my sister did marry him as she promised,
She has probably been blessed with adorable babies as she wished.”
On this alien land, calling to mind the old home deepened her dejection.
Her mind was lost in an entangled network of reflection.
The eagle had flapped his mighty wings and flown away, far and high.
Left behind, she kept scrutinizing the horizon, straining her eyes.
All of a sudden, while she was cogitating day and night,
Thundering and ravaging, the flame of war arrived,
Filling the atmosphere with horrible sensation.
War ship filled rivers, armored soldiers crowded roads, creating agitation.
Neighbors and acquaintances in the vicinity.
Advised her to take refuge for her own security.
She said, “I have promised him to wait here, How could I,
Even in case of danger, break my word and fly?”
She was still hesitating and somewhat confused when outside the house,
Flags floated gaily and megaphones resounded.
Armored soldiers come around the house;
In chorus, they asked for Madam’s whereabouts.
Ten field officers, in two single files, laid down
Their swords, took off their armor coats and kowtowed.
Then came ladies of honor and maid servants,
“By order, we came to escort your highness to her august husband.”
In a scarlet dress and with a sparkling queen’s hat, Kieu was resplendent.
She got in an imperial coach with embroidered phoenix on curtains.
With flags floating, drums rolling, the procession advanced;
The golden coach followed a magnificent royal band.
Holding a royal Rush insignia to open the way was a herald.
Soon Kieu heard the big drum resounding from the Headquarters General.
Flags were hoisted on ramparts and to salute Kieu a cannonade thundered.
Lord Tu, on horseback came out the gate to welcome her.
With his royal hat and royal cincture, he looked different,
But she still recognized his slanted brows and his chin so prominent.
He smiled and said, “Fish in water! What a perfect harmony!
Do you still remember what you have told me?
It takes a great mind to recognize a great mind.
Look! were you satisfied now with your hope by me realized?”
She said, “As an innocent girl, a frail liana, I have the honor
To find a big tree providing me protection and shelter.
This magnificent spectacle, I have waited until today to see,
But in my heart, since the day we first met, I was sure already.”
They looked at each other, bursting in laughter,
Then hand in hand, they retired for more confidence to their chamber.
A royal banquet was given to fete officers and men alike
With war drum resounding and martial music filling the night.
This glory and happiness fully compensated for her past misery;
Their love each day acquired new freshness and more intensity.
Kieu enjoyed life in the barracks, among the military.
One day, in a moment of leisure, she told Tu of her past stories,
“At Vo Tich and Lam Tri, I was victim of betrayals and cheats,
But sometimes I got assistance and relief.
Now my life, thanks to you, was free from miserable plights.
However, gratitude and vengeance remain to be settled if you do not mind.”
Lord Tu, who from start to end, listened attentively to her,
Got into a fit of ire that raged like thunder.
Soldiers were assembled and their commanders appointed immediately;
Under the flag, order for departure was given instantly.
With red flag leading the way, troops were sent,
Half departed for Vo Tich, the other half to Lam Tri went.
All those who had betrayed, perjured or flimflammed,
Were identified, arrest and brought to the central camp.
A Herald was sent with a special order to local authorities
To provide absolute security for the Thuc family.
Bonzess Giac Duyen and the head housekeeper
Were invited to the camp by another harbinger.
A proclamation was made, exposing the whole affair to the army.
All the men shook with indignation and orders were executed promptly.
The law of vengeance from Heaven was really awful!
With only one haul of the net, the batch was apprehended in full!
In the sun, unsheathed sabers and long spears glittered.
Troops were assembled in two rows, the honor guard deployed at the center.
Everything was ready, in good order, imposing, and the court yard
Was full of bronze cannon, flags and standards.
In the tiger tent that, the center of the camp, occupied,
Lord Tu and his august spouse were sitting side by side.
As soon as the drum roll signaling the opening stopped,
The roll call of suspects started and in for trial, they were brought.
“Rewards for benefactors and punishments of offenders,” said he,
“I leave it up to you to decide in good faith and equity.”
She said, “With the help of your authority and sway,
I will pay my debts first, 
Then I will avenge myself if I may.”
“Please do as you wish!” Tu replied.
An officer holding an unsheathed sword came to Thuc and invited
Him, who green with fear, trembled like an ill snipe.
Kieu said, “My debt of gratitude to you was gigantic as mountains and seas.
Do you still remember me, your old friend of Lam Tri?
I could not fulfill my moral obligation and duties,
But I never betrayed you. Someone caused the separation not me!
Here were a hundred rolls of brocade and a thousand pounds of silver,
Please accept them as a token of my gratitude for your love.
Your wife was a devilish, satanic, diabolic woman, truly.
The thief will soon clash with the lady she has robbed brutally
The ant that crawls on the rim of a cup will not go far. That’s evident!
Profound was her ruse and so shall be the sentence!
To Thuc, everyone turns his sight:
His visage was streaming with perspiration at the time.
He could not contain in his heart fright and delight:
Fright for his wife, delight for his erstwhile concubine.
Next came the old governess and the bonzess.
Kieu invited them to the seats of honor with eagerness,
She removed her veil, then holding their hands, said she
“Slave Flower or Trac Tuyen, that was only me!
When to the bottom of the chasm, misfortunes shoved me, you provided precious assistance to save me,
All the gold of this world could not pay for your generosity!
Here were a thousand taels of gold, a small gift, really.
Gold could never measure up to Mother Phieu’s generosity!
The two old women looked confused and mystified,
Half rejoiced, half stricken with fright.
Kieu said, “Please stay for a little while!
I would like you to see how I avenge myself this time.”
Order was given to officers to immediately bring
The prisoners before the audience for trial and hearing.
Sabers were unsheathed under the flags which were, in the wind, flapping.
Hoan Thu, the principal accused was called to the criminal ring.
Kieu gave a vitriolic greeting as Hoan Thu answered the call,
Here you are, Madam! Did you ever expect to come here at all?
Women like you will not be found in the streets easily.
Nowadays, much less than the old days, there were not many women of your species.
Gentleness and kindness, a woman should have at least some.
The more ruthless you are, the heavier consequences become.”
Panic stricken, Hoan Thu kneeled down,
And in front of Kieu she respectfully kowtowed.
“I am only a woman, humble and common,” explained she.
“And jealousy was a common sentiment shared by everybody.
You knew I was not merciless when you were hand copying sutras
And when you fled, I never tried to bring you back to the pagoda.
At the bottom of my heart, I respect and esteem you as you probably can see,
But no woman was willing to share her husband with another lady.
I did deliberately make your way somewhat thorny.
I now put my fate in your generous hands for clemency.”
Kieu said, “You really live up to your reputation of an uncommon lady
And your judicious language proves your intelligence superiority.
If I acquit you, you’ll be too lucky
But if I punish you, it will be too ignoble of me.
Now since you have showed some repentance,
I am going to give the order for your immediate clearance.”
Hoan Thu kowtowed her thanks; then soldiers
Brought in a file of prisoners
Kieu exclaimed, “O, Heaven high above! I never want to punish!
But they did evil and now to them evil shall be returned for justice.
First were Bac Ha and her nephew Bac Hanh,
Then came Mastiff, Falcon and So Khanh
Followed by Tu Ba and Ma Giam Sinh.
They all deserved chastisement, those horrible human beings.
Order was given to the executioner to apply
The punishments they had, in their own oaths, visualized.
A spectacle of blood streaming and human flesh lacerated to pieces
Terrified each and every one of the witnesses.
Heaven’s will was manifest in all events.
Traitors never anticipate their victims’ vengeance.
Those devilish swindlers and cruel rogues!
Why have pity on them? They reaped what they had sowed.
The entire army was present at the execution site;
Justice was administered under the blue sky, in broad daylight.
As soon as Kieu completed her revenge on her enemies,
Giac Duyen asked permission to take leave.
Kieu said, “This opportunity occurs once in a thousand years.
I do not think I can soon enjoy your company, O, my dear!
We were like duckweeds and clouds,
We have just been gathered yet we’re parting now! Where the migrating crane and the traveling cloud can be found?”
“It will not be too long!” the bonzess replied.
“We shall meet again in five years, not a very long time.
I remember my steps once brought me to a faraway country
Where I met Bonzess Tam Hop who, for friends, likes to tell prophecy.
She assured me I would see you two times but did not  specify how:
First this year, then five years from now.
Her predictions prove to be accurate and precise.
The first was already verified; the second shall be certainly realized.
Our affection ties will bind us together,
We shall see each other, our affinity was certainly not over.”
Kieu said, “Destiny can, of course, be prophesied.
I firmly believe that her predictions were always right.
Should you ever see her again, please
Ask her what the future has in store for me.”
With Kieu’s wishes, Giac Duyen promised to comply
Then expeditiously went away after saying good-bye
After the day she distributed rewards and punishments with justice,
Her heart was no longer immersed in the torturous ocean of injustice.
She kowtowed in front of Lord Tu. Said she,
“As a humble reed, I never expected such a glory.
Thanks to your august power as strong as thunder, all of a sudden,
I could take off my back the heavy burden.
In my heart and on my bones, your benefactions remain impressed.
Even with the price of my life I could never pay my immense debt.”
Tu said, “Of all times, no great men
Could find in one day a trusty confidant that can really understand them.
A hero worthy of the name, never lets an injustice
Found on his way go unpunished!
Furthermore, this was an affair of our family,
Yours and mine. Why do you have to thank me?
My preoccupation was that your parents, at this point in time,
Have been separated from you for a long, long while.
In spite of the long distance, I want you to be reunited
Under the same roof; until then I wo not be satisfied.”
He gave the order to prepare a great feast for his army
So soldiers and officers could celebrate the end of Kieu’s unjust misery.
Under the impetus of the domino effect, victory was scored after victory
Tu’s military might boomed like thunder in and out of his territory.
Cutting the empire in two, appropriating a sky corner,
He established his own royal court with both civil and military powers.
His victory like a thunderstorm kept raging, and in no time,
He captured the southern districts, all of the five.
With his invincible sword that he sharpened in the wind and dust,
All those coat stands and rice sacks, he could easily bust.
He conquered and dominated the East and South
And reigned over so many feudal lords and counts.
On the battle field no one could equal him in military power.
During five years, he ruled over the coastal area as an undisputed master.
Hien Ho Ton, a senior mandarin, competent in both politics and military
By the Emperor was appointed commander in chief and plenipotentiary
With full power to subdue the rebellion by any means if necessary.
The Emperor himself gave a push to Ho’s cart at the departure of the army.
Ho knew Tu was a hero who fought with skill and bravery
And that Kieu had an influential voice on Tu’s tactics and strategy.
After the camping of his troops, he made known his intention for peace.
To persuade Tu to capitulate, he sent a messenger with plenty of gifts,
And to Kieu he sent a very special favor:
A thousand pounds of jade and gold plus two ladies of honor.
The missive urging surrender arrived at Tu’s general headquarters.
Tu hesitated, not knowing the real intention behind the letter.
“With my own hands,” he said to himself, “I have built this empire
Where I have been acting in absolute liberty on rivers and seas of mine.
Should I tie my hands and surrender to the emperor now,
I would be a sad figure among the courtier crowd.
I would bind myself to those court dresses and be obliged
To kowtow in and out like those dukes and counts I never liked.
To have my own frontier was better.
They can do nothing to me, my military strength considered.
Now I can move sky and earth as I please
With no superior above me to restrain my liberty.
Naïve, Kieu trusted people more easily.
Rich gifts and sweet talk seduced her easily.
“I am like a duckweed at the mercy of the current,” thought she.
“I have wandered up and down and suffered terribly from adversities.
Should we accept to be loyal subjects of the emperor,
We would be on the wide road to riches and honors,
And personal and public interests would become reconciled.
I would then return to my native place after a while
With the rank and position of a great lady.
My visage would be glowing with glory, and my parents proud of me!
If so, I would have fulfilled my duties to both my family and my country:
To my parents, duties of a child and to the emperor, duties of loyalty.
Would it be better than to be a frail skiff in the middle of the ocean
In fear of every billow and any change in marine currents?”
During discussion about how Tu should decide,
To bring out her point of view, Kieu tried,
“Like a fertilizing rain, the emperor’s benefactions
Spread everywhere among the population with deep penetration.
He has pacified the empire and succeeded in law and order restoration.
[And brought about the respect of the population]vii
Since the starting day of this war, piles
Of innocent victims’ bones have grown quite high!
Is it a good thing to leave to posterity a bad reputation?
For the last thousand years, no one glorified Hoang Sao’s rebellion!
Why do not you accept high position and hefty emolument?”
Is there any better way to obtain both honors and substance?”
Tu, persuaded by her words both logical and tender,
Dropped his offensive plan and decided to surrender.
In haste, he made preparations to welcome the imperial envoy extraordinary.
He fixed the date for disarmament and decided to disband his army.
In the peace accord, Tu and his men had absolute confidence.
Flags floated nonchalantly and guard drumbeats became negligent,
In the camp, troops did not observe security measure,
And well aware of the situation, the imperials were.
Taking advantage of this lack of vigilance, Governor Ho decided:
Presents would lead the way, followed by troops for an attack by surprise.
A flag of peace was displayed at the head of the advance party,
And well camouflaged cannons followed the ceremonial formalities.
Lord Tu, in good faith suspected no shenanigan.
In formal court dress for the ceremony, he left the camp.
Governor Ho gave the signal for attack at the right time:
Cannons boomed and standards were raised from all sides.
Fallen into an ambush, taken by surprise,
The once invincible tiger lost all his military might,
But decided to make the enemy pay a high price for his life,
And to show how bravely a war chief could fight.
His soul already left for the Divinities’ sky,
But his body still stood firmly in the circle of steel and fire.
Solid as a rock, rigid as bronze, somehow,
No pushing, no shaking could rock him down.
The imperials chased the rebel troops in full flight,
The smell of carnage filled the atmosphere and rose to the sky.
Chaos prevailed everywhere: in the moats, behind the bastions.
Some disbanded soldiers led her by the hand to the position.
Arrows and balls raining on the battlefield met her sight
He was still standing there, erect and impassible under the blue sky!
She burst into sobs, “You had superior intelligence and bravery.
Only by listening to me did you meet such a tragedy.
How can I look at you now face to face?
It was better that we died together on the same date!”
On her painful face, tears were streaming down,
And head first, she threw herself to the ground.
Miraculous communion between two hearts by injustice broken!
The moment she tumbled, Tu’s body fell down all of a sudden!
Officers and men passing by took pity on her,
They picked her up and helped her recover.
They then brought her to the General Headquarters,
Where Governor Ho wholeheartedly welcomed her.
“You were a tender beautiful lady,” said he,
“Lost on the battlefield, driven to misery, what a pity!
This victory was undoubtedly the fruit of the virtues of our emperor;
Your advice to Tu did contribute to the success of the battle, however.
Now things have come to a quite satisfactory ending,
I leave it up to you to decide the reward you deem befitting.”
Again Kieu dissolved into tears of suffering.
After a moment of hesitation, she voiced he secret feelings.
“Tu was a hero,” said she, “living in absolute liberty
Under the vast sky and on the immense sea.
Because of his confidence in me, he made a mistake by listening to me.
That one invincible hero accepted vassalage just because of me,
Thinking vassalage would open the road to honors for him and his wife.
Who would doubt that his flesh and bones would be suddenly pulverized!
For five years, he ruled as an incontestable master of the seas and skies,
And now on the battle field, for nothing he sacrificed his life!
You mentioned my service, just to be kind,
But the more you speak, the more you lacerate my heart and mind!
I consider myself a criminal quite undeserving,
And I want to end my life that was now good for nothing.
Please give me a tiny piece of land, if you do not mind
So I can bury the man to whom I am bound in death and in life.”
These words moved Governor Ho and he gave the order
To perfunctorily bury the cadaver on the bank of the river.
A big feast was organized to celebrate the victory,
Officers and men enjoyed the music and delicacies.
Kieu was forced to attend upon Governor Ho’s table.
He, inebriated, compelled her to give a guitar recital.
The tune sounded like the wind moaning and the rain sobbing.
Kieu’s five fingers were bleeding on the four guitar strings
The strains were sadder than cicadas’ stridulations or gibbons’ cries.
Even Ho frowned and tears of sadness came to his eyes.
“Where does the tune come from?” asked he.
“It sounds like a thousand moanings and a sea of misery!”
She replied, “This was ‘The Cruel Destiny,’
A tune I composed myself in my infancy,
A tune of my own creation that I highly value.
And now, the victim of that cruel destiny was talking to you.”
The more Ho listened to her, the more he became enamored,
And that implacable iron face became inflamed with love!
“This encounter,” said he, “Seems to happen by affinity.
Have you any plan to splice up your broken ties of matrimony?”
She said, “I am a woman fallen from one misfortune to another,’
And having a man’s death on my conscience makes me terribly suffer!
What was left of me, a spent flower?
Like the strings of Tieu Lan’s guitar, my heart was torn asunder!
Thank you for your compassion for me, a humble lady.
I feel lucky if I can see again the elms of my native country.”
Ho, inebriated by victory, drank too much liquor at that time.
In the morning, he thought of his behavior the previous night,
And said to himself, “I am a state grandee.
My superior watches my behavior, and the public observes me.
A lost unfortunate lady! Am I supposed to woo?
To repair my mistake, what would I do?
At the opening of his morning audience, he made up his mind
And, to give an arbitrary command, he decided.
No one dared say anything against a mandarin’s order,
And poor Kieu was married by force to a tribe leader.
O, God of Marriage! You were supposed to weave matrimonial ties,
But you were too whimsical and you really made a blunder this time!
A floral palanquin took her to the nuptial boat, directly
The curtains were lowered; a lamp with high flame shined brightly.
The willow looked sadder; the flower lost its peachy color.
Nothing was left of her pristine freshness and good humor.
“it was better to be buried in the sand, under the billows,” thought she,
“I will fail my filial duties by destroying my life marred by a sad destiny.
I am now a wreckage floating on the immense sea, under the vast sky.
Whom could I entrust with the care of my bones, dead or alive?
Who destroyed my marriage that I cherish?
And now, who has forced me to be again remarried?
Why am I reduced to such a terrible plight?
One more day alive was one day too many for my life!
The joie de verve I no longer mine!
Why should I regret this horrible life and refuse to die?
The cup of bitterness and pungency has been drained to the dregs,
Let the jade break and the gold be smashed.”
The moon crescent was already hanging over the mounts.
Alone and restless, Kieu stood up then sat down.
Suddenly she heard the rumbling sound of the rising tide.
It was the Tien Duong River, she was advised.
She remembered she had a dream with a prophecy about her destiny.
“It was here that my existence of Rent Entrails must end sadly.
O, Dam Tien, my dear! This was the place of rendezvous you gave me.
Please wait under the billows to welcome me!”
Under the lamp there lay a paper with floral design.
She wrote a poignant poem of farewell before her suicide.
She drew the beaded curtain aside;
Before her eyes, the vast river merged into the high sky.
She murmured, “Lord Tu treated me with kindness and generosity.
I wanted to serve my country, but I betrayed him really!
Kill a husband the take another husband, how could I?
How could I have the face to continue such an ignoble life?
The best thing for me now was to die
And confide my lacerated heart to the billows and sky.”
With sad eyes, she scanned the immense water
Then threw herself into the depth of the long river.
Every possible effort to rescue her was made by the leader of the tribe.
But gone was the body of jade with a perfume so sublime!
Alas! She was a human being like others,
But her stunning beauty and talents made her suffer.
Misfortunes, injustices, sad adventures, she went through them all somehow;
What was left of her when the effects of her karma were drawn down?
Fifteen years of misfortunes! Fifteen years of misery!
For ladies, that was a living example of a beauty with a cruel destiny.
She had definitely reached the limits of human misery.
Who would know that the yang was always reborn at the yin’s acme?
But, for good people fulfilling their moral obligation and filial duties,
Why did Heaven often reserve long ordeals and miseries?
Leaving Kieu, Giac Duyen was free as a wandering cloud,
With her gourd canteen and a pilgrim bag she was traveling about.
To meet prophet Tam Hop, she again had the opportunity
And asked her about the details of Kieu’s destiny.
“Why to that virtuous lady,” asked she,
“Does fate reserve so many adversities?”
Tam hop said, “Happiness and misery were dictated by the law of Heaven.
But they also take roots in the heart of humans.
Heaven was there just to dispense according to man’s deeds.
Happiness resides in the renouncement of passions, honors, and riches while love and passion open the way to malediction and distress.
Kieu possessed intelligence and beauty
But Heaven always hounds the fate of beautiful ladies.
Also, all the load of her love, Kieu carried
And obstinately tied herself to that amour so rigidly.
That’s why, even in shelters of peace, her mind
Could not be at ease and she never stayed for a long while.
As if gremlins seduced her and devils guided her
She always took the road to woes and disasters!
Catastrophe followed catastrophe: she was two times
In a bordello, and she donned the servants’ blue livery twice.
She has lived among men armed with spears and sabers,
Among evil, ferocious people, among slaves and toilers.
In the middle of the current, amid tumultuous swells of the water,
She would throw herself to become food for fish and marine monsters.
Malediction follows love passion indefinitely.
She was the only person to comprehend it and to suffer secretly.
Her life would be a long tragedy, and unhappy, she would die.
The lacerating of her entrails would only stop with the end of her life!”
Upon this prophecy, Giac Duyen said, dolefully surprised,
“Alas! So, she was finished! So, ended was her life!”
Tam Hop replied. “That’s not true! Do not you worry
Sins and merits were to be weighed and re-weighed carefully.
Speaking of Kieu’s karma, all things considered,
She avoided immoral lechery although she did fall in love
She sacrificed her profound love to pay the deep filial debt of hers
And has touched Heaven by selling herself to save her father.
She caused the death of just one man to save thousands. What a deed!
She can tell right from wrong, justice from injustice.
With her truly peerless merits and virtues,
She has paid in full her previous balance due.
Heaven, for such a case, knows how to show His clemency.
Her debts fully paid, she can expect a life free from misery.
Giac Duyen, my sister! If you still value your friendship with her,
With a reed raft, try to save her life on the Tien Duong River.
By doing so, you’ll be able to keep your promise,
And Heaven shall give you credit for a noble deed.”
Giac Duyen felt her heart filled with joy and excitement.
Off she went to the Tien Duong River and on its embankment,
She built herself a thatched roof chapel shelter
Where she could enjoy golden clouds sailing over the blue water.
She hired by the year two fishermen;
From their boat they watched the nets hung across the current.
Patient, she did not mind hard work and was very determined,
And the encounter did take place as predestined.
After jumping into the silvery billows of the river,
Kieu was carried by the current down to the net awaiting her.
The fishermen pulled up the net and brought her to safety.
Tam Hop’s prophecy, in every detail became reality.
Lying, molded in her silk dress, with water streaming,
She was soaking wet but her radiance was still glowing.
At first sight, Giac Duyen recognized her face,
But the deep unconsciousness she was in, was not yet dissipated.
While in the kingdom of dreams and rainbows, she was wandering
She saw Dam Tien, her friend of yore, coming.
Dam Tien said, “With all my heart, these last fifteen or so years,
I have been waiting for you here.
Great were your virtues but fragile was your destiny.
Your heart was sterling by your karma rather heavy.
Your good faith has won Heaven’s clemency.
You saved the lives of thousands, you sold yourself out of filial piety.
Your will to serve your country and your people was persistent,
And these merits have tipped in your favor, the balance.
Your name on the list of Rent Entrails Girls has been crossed out.
So, the ten poems you wrote when we first met, I return to you now.
You shall have many more days, beautiful and happy.
The erstwhile hymen will be accomplished and your bliss was guaranteed.”
The long discourse left her confused and surprised.
“Trac Tuyen!” Someone called in her ear at that time.
The call startled her and roused her up from slumbers.
Still somnolent, she looked around in wonder.
No Dam Tien on the boat and this bothered he mind.
Instead, she saw Giac Duyen sitting by her side.
The two women were delighted to find again each other,
And they left the boat for the thatched chapel shelter.
They lived in the cottage and had a very happy time,
Enjoying the vegetarian diet, the breeze and the moonlight.
The immense landscape stretched as far as the eyes could see, all around.
Tides put rhythm to their life in the cottage surrounded by rosy clouds.
Kieu had shaken off all the misfortunes of yesteryear,
But doubted that her broken love could ever be reborn here.
They were truly over, all Kieu’s catastrophes and miseries.
But poor Kim Trong! These years he had been suffering terribly.
To Lieu Duong, he went a thousand miles to attend his uncle’s funeral
And made the long trip back home, half a year after the burial.
He came to the garden of their love upon arrival,
But the landscape was not the same as before at all.
With tall grass and reeds, the garden was covered.
Forlorn window of moonlight! Walls crumbled because of weather!
No human silhouette was seen around the house,
Only flowers of last year’s peach trees smiling to the East wind were found.
Swallows were bulleting through empty chambers,
Weeds had invaded the ground, and footprints with moss were covered.
At the end of the wall, thorny vines were thriving,
Covering the trail they had used for their love meeting.
The place was forlorn, dominated by the most profound silence.
Whom could he ask about his worries and secret sentiments?
A neighbor happened to pass by. Immediately,
Kim approach him and asked questions about Kieu’s family.
The old Vuong? He had been unjustly indicted as law breaker.
And Kieu? She had sold herself to save her father.
The family? They had moved out and left the country.
Vuong Quan and Thuy Van? 
They were both reduced to abject poverty.
Living hand to mouth by hand copying and sewing late in the night.
The bad news struck Kim like a clap of thunder in a clear sky!
How terrible he was stunned, dumbfounded and terrified!
He inquired about the family’s new domicile in great haste.
Then following the directions, he directly came to the place.
It was a thatched cottage with dirt walls somewhat shabby
With reed blinds and makeshift bamboo partitions quite mangy.
A weedy yard rutted by rain met his sight,
The more he looked, the more he was stupefied.
He ventured to raise his voice and called, finally.
Vuong heard him and came out in a hurry.
He let him in, taking his hand warmly.
The parents came out to meet Kin immediately.
Crying, lamenting, they told Kim the entire story,
“Dear Kim! Do you know how terribly we suffered from the calamity?
Our little Kieu does have a fragile destiny!
To you she has been engaged for matrimony,
But due to the catastrophe striking our family,
She had to sell herself to save her daddy.
Her decision to leave took her a long while.
She suffered terribly and repeated her vow three or four times.
She said her solemn promise, to you she had given
And asked he sister Van to replace her in keeping her engagement,
Hoping she could fulfill part of her moral commitment.
Her suffering was immense and would last a thousand existences!
She added she had betrayed your love because of our sad plight
But would compensate you in her next life.
Those were the final words, the ultimate vows of hers.
We engraved them in our hearts the moment she left us forever.
O, Kieu! Why destiny was so cruel to you? My dear child!
Here was Kim coming to you but where were you at this time?”
The more the parents talked, the more twinges they sustained.
The more Kim listened, the more lacerating became his pain.
Wildly he rolled on the floor, bitterly he cried.
Streaming were his tears and lost was his mind.
When coming to himself, 
he passed out again because of desperation.
Watching Kim’s distress caused by separation,
Mr. Vuong tried to contain his emotion and gave Kim some consolation,
“Now the board to the boat has been nailed!
Because of her cruel destiny,
Faithful to your love she cannot remain.
But do not let it overwhelm you and affect your health.”
To give Kim consolation, they tried their best,
But the more they tried the worse became his sadness.
They showed the jewelry of the engagement
And the guitar and incense, their love oath evidence.
The more he looked, the more he missed her,
And the more he felt the brutal laceration of their broken love.
He said, “I made a big mistake in leaving her.
Because of me, the current could drag the fallen flower.
We have seriously pledged to love each other.
Our love oath was adamant and must be seriously considered.
Though we have not shared the bed, we were husband and wife.
Break the love ties of our hearts, how could I?
No matter how much money I have to spend and how long the search is,
I am determined to find her as long as I live.”
He could not express all his grief and sufferings.
He took leave of the Vuong, checking his sobbing.
Back home, he improved and organized the building in the garden,
Then invited the Vuong to come and live in the new apartments.
Morning and evening, he lavished on Kieu’s parents
Tender loving care in replacement of Kieu’s absence.
In ink mixed with tears, he wrote letter after letter.
He hired people to search for her and hoped his letters would reach her.
For the search he spared neither effort nor expense.
Several times to far away Lam Thanh, back and forth he went.
But while he was scouring one area for her, she was living in another!
The sky was immense and the sea leviathan, how could he pinpoint her?
It made him feel distressed and miserable, the futile long search.
He felt his liver incandescent and his heart battered.
Each day, more and more, his entrails withered,
And his body wilted like a cicada in winter.
Now lucid, now lost in dream, he became nonchalant.
His tears were tinged with blood, his soul left him in phantasm.
Experiencing inexpressible worries, the parents
Were afraid that the worst might happened.
They made preparations and selected a day supposed to be lucky
For the wedding between Kim and young Van in a hurry.
She, a beautiful and charming lady, he a young savant,
In their primrose days, the couple combined beauty and talent.
The conjugal union did bring him some jollity
But could not dissipate his profound melancholy.
The more enjoyable appeared conjugal intimacy and life,
The more his first love lacerated his heart and mind.
Each time he thought of Kieu’s misfortune and misery,
He could not help shedding tears and his entrails tangled intricately.
Sometimes in the solitude of his library, he burned some incense remnants
And tried to play a tune on the guitar, their love’s token.
The muted notes sounded like admonition and scolding,
Incense smoke was perfume-less behind the curtains that were undulating.
He seemed to hear Kieu’s voice under the roof and porch echoing
And, as in a dream, he saw in his study, her dress delicately floating.
His faithful heart and mind had been filled up with her image and love.
She would appear to him as in an illusion whenever he thought of her.
For him, days and nights, in sadness went by
The seasons followed one another many times, but he did not seemed to mind.
A special mandarinal exam was organized by an imperial decree,
Both Vuong and Kim, on the same spring day, received the doctorate degree at a banquet in the imperial park, by the emperor they were greeted.
For them, the heavenly door to honors was wide open now.
And in no time, good news of their glory reached their home towns.
Thinking of the old days of misfortune, young Vuong himself
Went to Mr. Chung’s home to thank him for his help.
To pay his debt of gratitude and make the two families closer together,
He asked for the hand of Mr. Chung’s daughter and married her.
The more Kim progressed on the road to honors,
The more he thought of Kieu and the more he loved her. He murmured,
“With whom did I exchange gold and stone love pledge?
With whom am I now sharing jade mansion and horses with golden harness?
She was like a duckweed that the billow of misfortune toss up and down
While I am living in honors and riches, not knowing of her whereabouts!”
Kim was appointed head of the district of Lam Tri.
With his family, he traveled thousands of miles to his place of duty.
Peace in his district made his days and months quite enjoyable.
His guitar and pet crane made his morning and evenings quite relishable.
It was spring and behind pink curtain, Van was enjoying conjugal life.
Suddenly, Kieu appeared to her in a dream at night.
Waking up, she told Kim about the encounter in the dream.
He believed only half of the story, at least so it seemed.
He thought, “We searched for her in Lam Thanh and we were in Lam Tri now
Only the last word was different! Probably there was a mistake somehow.
Let’s try again. Affinity always makes us search for each other.
Maybe this time, we’ll have good news of her.”
The next morning for a thorough investigation, he gave order.
An old clerk named Do disclosed the whole matter.
Do said, “Sir, over ten years back, the story dated.
I knew all the persons involved, their names and their faces.
Tu Ba and Sinh Giam Ma bought a girl from Peking somehow
And brought her down here to their bawdy house.
Thuy Kieu was her name; incomparable were her beauty and talent.
She was a born poet and her guitar performance was also excellent.
She showed extraordinary courage in preserving her chastity.
First she attempted suicide then she was victim of betrayals and duperies.
After enduring considerable ignominy and misery,
She became Thuc’s concubine and lived with him in secrecy.
But Thuc’s legitimate wife, who was cruel and clever, kidnapped her
And brought her to Vo Tich, intending to break that tender flower.
Driven to the wall, she had to flee
But only to fall into the bad hands of the Bac family.
She was bought then resold like a piece of merchandise.
As a floating duckweed, a wandering cloud, she constantly hiked.
Then she met a man, great in courage and mind,
Whose military strength could quiver earth and sky.
His one-hundred-thousand-man army
Conquered and occupied the citadel of Lam Tri.
In reckoning the details of her past catastrophes,
She punished her enemies and rewarded her benefactors with equity.
Her perfect sense of justice and her great generosity
Were acclaimed and praised by everyone far and near.
The name of the war chief, I ignore.
About the details of Kieu’s story, Thuc can give you more.”
Following the clear information by Do furnished,
Kim sent an invitation card and urgently invited Thuc to his office.
He bombarded Thuc with all possible questions on her life and whereabouts
And asked about the activities and name of her present spouse.
”It was a period of military disturbances,” Thuc answered the questions.
I was in the camp and so could gather some detailed information.
Hai Tu was the name of that great warlord.
His strength was extraordinary and over a hundred battles he fought.
He first met her in the district of Thai.
It was natural that a beauty joined a genius in conjugal combine.
For many years he reigned as an invincible master,
Quaking earth and sky with his military claps of thunder.
His great army then moved to the East, I guess because of strategy.
From that time on, I lost track of him and his army.”
The detailed account about her and Tu plunged Kim in despair and misery.
Sadness invaded his heart and made him feel uneasy. To himself, said he,
“She was a leaf torn from the tree by the wind and gone with it!
When could her misery in the world of dust be finished?
Flower by the stream drawn, by the billows tossed up and down!
What a pity! She must have suffered tremendously as the story sounds!
Alas! Our love oath has now become a perjury.
The incense remnants were still there and the same guitar I still see,
But lifeless, the sounds of the guitar seem to be.
Could the love union sworn with burning incense ever become reality?
Like a duckweed, she was tossed up and down by the billows of misery.
How could I have the heart to enjoy riches and luxury?
I intend to resign and my mandarinal seal, I shall surrender.
In search of her, I am prepared to cross mountains and rivers.
Only by braving swords, spears and danger,
And by risking my life, do I have any hope of finding her.
But how to trace a bird, in vast skies skimming?
How to follow a wake of a fish, in the abyss swimming?”
Still patient in his waiting for more advice,
He let rain follow shine, and time went by.
Suddenly, came a decree from the celestial emperor,
Written on paper decorated with clouds of rainbow colors.
To Nam Binh as a governor, Kim was transferred
And to assume a new position in Chau Duongviii city, Vuong was ordered.
Preparations were made in a hurry, horses and wagons were soon ready.
The two families traveling in the same direction, departed immediately.
They learned that the rebellion had been shattered;
War fire in Chiet Giang was doused, and the fighting in Phuc Kien was over.
Kim and Vuong, taking advantage of the newly restored peace and order,
Agreed that they would, during the trip, resume the search for her.
When they arrived at Hang Chau, they could gather
The latest news in precise details about Kim’s lover.
The battle, they were told, had taken place not long ago.
Falling into an ambush, Tu had died as a hero.
Kieu received no award for the great service rendered.
Instead, she had been forced to marry a tribe chief by Ho, the governor.
So, she destroyed her body of jade by jumping into the flowing water.
The Tien Duong River thus became the grave of a great lover.
Alas! The eventual reunion they hoped for turned out to be a final good-bye!
The entire family knew opulence and honors, but she had to end her life.
For a mass of requiem according to rituals, they made preparations,
And before an altar on the river bank, they prayed for her redemption.
As far as the eye could see, white waves were rolling with the tide rising.
They seemed to notice a pink silhouette, into the river diving.
Blood ties gave them hallucination in such a moment of dolor.
When could be the unconsoled soul of the Tinh Ve bird? They wondered.
A miraculous coincidence occurred, seemingly by Heaven decided:
On that day, Bonzess Giac Duyen happened to pass by.
And Kieu’s name on the commemorative tablet met her sight.
”But who were you, ladies and gentlemen?” asked she, mystified.
“How were you related to her? Could you please, tell me?
She was still alive! Why this mass of requiem for a living lady?”
Those questions dumbfounded all the family.
They asked questions and introduced themselves to the bonzess instantaneously.
“This was her husband, this her father and this her mother.
This was her sister-in-law, this her sister and this her brother.
We learned about her death from good source and now your reverend
To the contrary, was telling us that she still was in this existence!”
The bonzess replied, “Because of karma affinity,
I met her on this river after seeing her in Lam Tri.
When her body of jade was drowned in the river,
I was already waiting and found her, then took her to my shelter.
We have been living since in the house of Buddha,
Which was quite near here, not very far.
At the feet of Buddha we spent days of peace and leisure
But she misses you all so much that nothing can mollify her dolor.
Upon this accurate good news, all faces with joy were lighted.
No delectation could surpass their delight at this time.
Since the leaf had been torn away from the timberland,
They had been looking for her, scouring waters and lands by chance.
Obviously, the flower had been gone, with its exquisite fragrance.
They had hoped to see her only in the next existence.
Thinking her world of darkness was separated from their world of light,
How could they believe they could see a dead person revivified?
They kowtowed before Giac Duyen to express their thanks
Then walked with her along the river bank.
While clearing through tall weeds and reeds a path,
They still had some doubt in their inner hearts.
The trail followed a winding course with the meandering bank.
They saw the Buddhist temple when coming out of the reeds land.
Raising her voice, Giac Duyen called at the door.
With gold lotus steps, Kieu came out to meet her sponsor.
To her great surprise, she noticed the presence of her entire family;
Her old father was still healthy and her mother still bright and cherry.
Now became respectable adults, her younger brother and sister.
And there was also Kim, her erstwhile lover!
She doubted the reality of the moment.
She thought she was dreaming although her eyes were wide open.
Abundant tears wetted her robe when suddenly she started crying;
Joy was mixed with pain and her heart was filled with a host of feelings.
She threw herself on her mother’s knees,
And controlling her sobs she told her story of misery,
For fifteen years, fifteen rueful years, living in exile,
I was like a duckweed tossed up and down by billows and tide.
I thought I would be buried in the sand bed of the river.
How could I ever imagine that I would see you all again? No, never!”
The parents held her hands and scrutinized her face:
There was almost no change in the features of her visage,
But for a long period of time, beaten by inclement weather,
It had lost some of its springtime radiance, the exquisite flower.
Their joy of reunion was immense, beyond any description.
They had so many things to tell after so many long years of separation.
Her two younger siblings asked her so many questions!
Kim’s sorrow became joy as he witnessed the scene of reunion.
Before Buddha’s altar, they all fell into a prostrate position,
Thanking the Merciful for permitting such a miraculous resurrection.
Palanquins were ready, pressing the departure.
All had to return to the same house, according to Mr. Vuong’s order.
Kieu said, “I am a flower detached from the tree
And have spent half my life tasting bitterness and pungency.
I thought, under the billows, beyond the clouds, my life was done,
And never dreamed of living these precious minutes of gold.
Resuscitated, I now find you all again, and this moment,
My thirst for reunion has been quenched by your being here present.
I have decided to confine my life in this humble tabernacle, however.
For me, to spend the rest of my life with Mother Nature,  it was better.
I have developed a liking for this religious life of salt and vegetables.
In my brown religious clothes, I feel very comfortable.
Doused in my heart were all passion with their ardent fires!
Plunge myself again in mundane affairs, why should I?
My spring days were gone, How could I quit my holy order halfway?
I have entered the religious life and until the end I shall stay.
Reverend Giac Duyen has saved my life; her benefaction was like the vast ocean and immense sky
Leaving without paying my debt of gratitude to her, how could I?
Mr. Vuong replied, “Each period of time requires a specific commitment;
Religion always allows you to bow to circumstance.
I know that you want to devote your life to Buddha’s religion.
But who will pay your filial debt and fulfill your love obligation?
We could build a tabernacle for your great benefactress.
Then you will invite her in to live with us to show your thankfulness.”
Upon these words Kieu knew she should surrender to her father.
They all said good-bye to the bonzess then left the house of prayers.
At Vuong Quan’s yamen, the entire household arrived
And to celebrate the family reunion, a banquet was organized.
When the chrysanthemum wine gave everyone a sweet tipsiness,
Van stood up and said with gladness and seriousness,
“By the will of Heaven the Almighty,
You two met then exchanged love oath seriously.
But our family was stricken with a catastrophic disaster,
And the junior sister was thus married to the senior sister’s lover.
The ties of that union were obviously predestined.
Anyway, were we not from the same blood and intestines?
Day after day we were living in wait for you, hoping for the best.
These fifteen years, we were thinking of you with much love and regrets.
Now the broken mirror has found its initial flawless shape.
Enigmatic Heaven finally has reserved for you a place.
Love still exists, and fortunately, the object of love still breathes;
The silver moon was still witnessing the love oath that always persists.
The peach flower was still radiant, although the apricot was overripe.
But in a hurry, the wedding can be celebrated just in time.”
Kieu voiced her rejection of the proposal immediately,
“Why do you bring up that affair as ancient as history?
I admit, by love oath of yore, to him I was engaged.
But I was since exposed to wind and rain that really ravaged.
I die from shame when my infamous past I mention.
So please, let the tide wash it down into oblivion.”
Kim replied, “Your speech sounds quite strange!
You want it that way! But how about your engagement?
Between us a solemn oath has been exchanged
And witnessed by both Earth and Heaven.
Change and fall, everything, including stars, might
But not a love oath! You must keep it, dead or alive.
Does the marriage betray our love?
Then why do you have the heart to cut it asunder?”
She said, “A sweet conjugal life
With tender loving care between husband and wife was definitely the dream and hope of all humankind.
But to preserve the sacred hymeneal ties,
The flower must be immaculate, and the moon in its plenitude must shine.
Virginity was worth thousands of taels of gold!
In the nuptial room, how could I help reddening before my lover of old?
Since the time calamity fell upon me,
I was, so many times, dishonored by butterflies and bees.
Wind and rain were ravaging my body and mind.
What flower that would not falter, what moon that would not be sliced?
What was left of my rosy cheeked person?
My mundane life was dead, why this plan of resuscitation?
In thinking of myself, I feel immersed in ignominy.
How dare I become a legitimate wife with my person so impure and dirty?
I know that your heart was full of love for me, certainly,
But under the nuptial lamp, shame will kill me surely!
From now on, I shall close the autumnal chamber of mine.
Although not in holy orders, I shall live a quasi-religious life.
If you still concern yourself with our love of long past time,
Let us be under the same roof as friends, not as husband and wife.
Let us not talk about marriage and conjugal union!
Not only it afflicts my heart but also covers me with evil reputation.”
He said, “Very smart were your arguments and verbalization!
But you should consider other people’s reasons.
Among the good wife’s qualities, virginity was the most important always,
But it should be observed in more than one way.
An exceptional circumstance differs from normal time.
And we must accept exceptions to the rule to be applied.
For you, your filial piety replaces your virginity.
No dirt, no soil can stain your purity.
Heaven reserves for us this day of happy reunion.
Fog has dissipated at our door, and the sky was cloudless and clarion.
The wilted flower now regains its freshness of full bloom,
The waning moon now shines more brightly than when it was full.
Please remove the shadow of any doubt in your mind!
Do not make me another Tieu, do not consider me as a passer-by!”
Listening to Kim emptying his heart with ardor,
The parents gave their approval in Kim’s favor.
Running out of arguments, Kieu had to comply,
And lowering her head, she gave a deep sigh.
The banquet of reunion thus became the wedding party:
Nuptial lights were added and pink curtains were installed immediately.
Salutes and congratulation were exchanged joyfully.
After the wedding rituals, they were united by matrimony.
In the nuptial room, they shared the same tortoise cup of hymen.
Happiness of the present union rekindled their past love reminiscence.
Since the day when they were still young and first time lovers,
Fifteen eventful years had gone by, but they still remembered.
The profound love, that cruel separation before this unexpected reunion.
A spring time of feelings: happiness mixed with desperation!
The night was wearing on, the moon was high in the sky.
Behind bed curtains, her radiant face was enhanced by the nuptial light.
Lover came face to face with lover!
They finally found their lost love, the old bee and the timeworn flower.
She said, “To my sad destiny, I already resign.
It was now useless, to be thrown away, this odious body of mine!
But because of your ardent love for me, I tried
To please you by pretending to agree to be your mundane wife.
In my heart, I feel disgraced odiously
Because this was for me, too much effrontery and audacity.
If we could live with exterior affection, I would have enough courage
To raise my head and look people in the face.
But if you following common men’s inclination for carnal love,
Want to glean the perfume on the ground and pick a late season flower,
We would display a spectacle of horrible indecency,
And there would be no love, only hatred and repugnancy.
If in responding to your great love, I cover you with ignominy,
Our love would be ten times worse than animosity.
If your concern was the continuation of the lineage of the family,
My younger sister was there, and you do not need me certainly.
I have left only this little bit of purity,
I mean to preserve it, not to trample on it heavily.
With my platonic love for you, my heart was brimming over.
What pleasure was there for you in playing with this spent flower?”
He said, “A solemn engagement had bound us together,
But suddenly we were separated like a bird in the sky and a fish in water.
I was in agony when the long exile you were enduring;
The graver the love pledge, the more painful the suffering!
We braved death and hardships in life because of our love
Now we have to realize hymen since we’ve found each other.
I have thought that the willow still verdant and in its springtime
Could not escape the law governing love in life
But the mirror was absolutely clear, free of dust and grime.
I respect your intention and my esteem for you grows extremely high.
Trying to find the lost needle, I was probing underneath the ocean
Because of our serious love pledge, not because of carnal delectation.
Now, beyond expectation, under the same roof, we were reunited,
No need of sharing the same bed to be husband and wife.”
Upon these noble words, she straightened her dress, put back her hair pin,
Then kowtowed to thank Heaven for the bliss she was living in.
She said, “Thanks to your noble heart that was far above the ordinary,
This sullied body of mine, now decontaminated, has regained its purity.
Those words coming from the bottom of your heart really touch my heart.
Your understanding was that of a true friend, a true better half
I do appreciate the spiritual protection and shelter you offer me.
My honor and my chastity depend on this memorable night as you can see.”
Again and again, he tenderly held the hand of hers.
He loved her more for her virtue and became inebriated by her love.
They refilled the candelabrum and incense burner
And had more drink, enjoying their being together.
The love of yore was rekindled, brimming over their hearts and minds.
He inquired about her virtuosity in guitar of long past time.
“Because of those silk chords,” she replied,
“I had to suffer from misfortune after misfortune until the present time.
But now  it was too late to express any regret of mine.
Because of you, my love, I will play one more time.”
The strings began palpitating under her fingers of fairy.
The incense smoke spirals were mingled with high and low notes sodaintily.
What was that tune that gave warmth and serenity of springtime?
Was it Trang Chu dreaming or was it the butterfly?
What the tune that caressed like love in springtime!
Was it king Thuc’s voice or was it the water rail’s litany in moonlight?
Pearls falling into the water of the blue lagoon, limpid notes were like.
Warm notes were drops of jade that had just been crystallized.
The five note gamut under the virtuoso’s hands was deployed harmoniously.
Each was full of tenderness and troubled the heart deliciously.
He said, “It was another type of music though performed by the same fingers.
Before it was sad and mournful, now it was filled with delight and pleasure.
Sadness and gaiety comes from our heart.
It was obvious that misery over and happiness starts.”
She said, “Because of this entertaining hobby,
I wrote the Rent Entrails tune that made me suffer terribly.
For my true friend, this was the last time I play.
I shall roll up the strings and for ever put the guitar away.”
More confidences, they were still exchanging
When the roosters’ songs announcing dawn, started echoing.
Kim frankly told everyone about what happened during the night.
There was a chorus of praises and the family was joyfully surprised.
She was a virtuous lady of noble mind
Not a libertine who leads a dissolute life.
As lovers and friends, they fulfilled to perfection their duties.
If they did not share the bed, they did enjoy each other’s company.
She savored wine with him; he played chess with her.
Watching the flower open or sighting the moon rise, they enjoyed together.
Their love vows and aspirations were thus realized.
They were intimate friends in addition to being spiritual husband and wife.
They had a tabernacle built, keeping their promise
And sent for Bonzess Giac Duyen, their benefactress.
The messenger found the temple door closed and bolted when he arrived,
Moss covering the interstices, tall weeds attaining roof height.
The bonzess had gone away to herborize.
That wandering cloud, that voyager crane, where could Kieu find?
In memory of the philanthropic nun, each morning and evening
Kieu went to the temple to keep the incense and lamp burning.
Wealth and happiness were bountiful for the family:
In their mandarinal careers the men advanced in rank steadily.
Van fulfilled her duties beautifully, perpetuating the line of descendants.
The family tree grew with numerous branches quite magnificent.
Very few people could compete with them in wealth and glory.
The renown of their spring garden would have its place in history.
Everything here below depends on Heaven’s will, definitely.
To each and every human being He assigned a destiny.
If to a life of wind and dust, He condemns us, we shall live a rueful life in wind and dust
Should he bless us with nobility and purity,
In nobility and purity we shall live happily
Heaven was free from any partiality,
He never privileges anyone with both talent and good destiny.
Of our talent, let us not be arrogant
Because catastrophe seems to always follow talent.
We all carry with us our own karma.
So, we should not blame Heaven, be He near or far.
In our heart, good has its origin and commencement
A noble heart was three times better than the best talent.
With my rustic language, I tried to make a potpourri
That would give a few hours of entertainment, hopefully.
