Within a hundred-year lifespan in this earthly world,
Genius and Destiny have a tendency to oppose each other.
A turbulent mulberry-field-covered-by-sea period had passed.
The things that we saw still deeply pain our hearts.
it was not strange that beauty may beget misery.
The jealous gods tend to heap spites on rosy-cheeked beauties.
Turning scented pages of an old volume under an oil lamp,
I started reading a long-ago tale of love and romance.
It was during the Chia-Ching’s rule of the Ming dynasty.
The two capitals were stable; peace reigned in the country.
There was a respectable townsman with surname Vương.
Of modest wealth, he belonged to the middle class of society.
He had a son, the youngest, named Vuong Quan,
to carry on the family lineage of Confucian scholars.
The first-borns were two beautiful daughters.
Thúy Kiều the eldest, Thúy Vân the younger.
Apricot slender in frame, snow pure in spirit.
Each to her own charms, but both girls were perfect.
Vân’s beauty was very remarkable.
Her eyebrows – full crescent arcs, her moonlit face – oval.
Jades tingled in her voice; flowers bloomed from her smile.
Her speech: educated, chaste and refined.
Clouds yielded to her hair’s lustrous shine and flow.
Snow ceded to the silky whiteness of her skin’s glow.
Kiều, the eldest, was especially witty and charming.
Her talents and beauty even surpassed her sister.
Her eyes: soul-deep liquid pools of autumn lake water.
Her eyebrows: silhouettes of mount’n crests in spring.
Flowers envied her captivating looks.
Willows grieved at her youthful freshness.
One smile could rock a fortress and two a nation.
Other girls might have comparable talents,
but none could compare to her beauty’s perfection.
Endowed with intelligence gifted by the gods,
music, painting, poetry, and singing were her accomplishments.
Well versed in music theory and the art of the moon lute,
she composed a long music piece, named “Thankless Fate”,
about the life of an ill fated beauty,
that would move the hearts of her listeners to pity.
Nobly elegant and multi-talented were the two sisters.
Although they both had reached the age of marriage,
they stayed at home quietly behind closed curtains and drapes,
not heeding the comings and goings
of the bees and butterflies
from the eastern wall nearby.
Like a sparrow moving back and forth on a spindle,
spring days came and went ever so quickly.
Already it was more than sixty days into the season.
Young grass stretched a fresh greenness to the far horizon.
On the pear branches, sprinkled a few white flowers.
It’s Qingming day in March when the tombs of loved ones
are visited and cleaned, and the festival,
“Treading on the Grass”, is a celebration of spring.
Near and far, young people were eager to go out on a walk.
The two sisters also prepared for their spring day outing.
The streets were full of well-dressed scholars and fair maidens.
Horses and carriages moved unceasingly like water.
The roads were jam-packed with people.
As the two sisters came up to the burial mounds,
ashes of golden rolls and paper money,
scattered by the wind, lay all over the grounds…
Gradually, the sun moved to the West.
The sisters wistfully headed for home.
Pacing leisurely alongside a streamlet,
the scenery was painting-like delicate.
Here, the water curved around a bend.
There, a little bridge across the waters, at the far end.
Suddenly, a lowly mound of earth on the trailside appeared,
where the sad-looking grass looked half yellow, and half green.
Kiều asked, “Why is it that in the Qingming festival,
there is no incense for this burial grave?”
Vuong Quan, the youngest brother, replied:
“‘Tis the grave of Đạm Tiên, once a well-known songstress.
She has renowned for her talents and beauty.
Outside her door, there was no lack of butterflies and bees.
But the fate of a beauteous woman has ever been fragile.
In the mid of her blooming youth, the heavenly fragrant flower
had departed from this world forever.
There was a man from a faraway place.
Attracted by her fame, he wanted to meet her.
The love boat would just arrived in the harbor,
but the brooch already broken, the vase shattered.
Her empty room, lifelessly cold and silent.
Green moss already started to cover
the traces of horses and carriages of her admirers.”
The man shed tears and cried:
“How regretful that we are not destined for each other.
If we can not in this lifetime be together,
here is a token of love to inspire Fate
to let us meet in some future lives and become heart-mates.”
He then bought a rosewood coffin and arranged a lavish funeral.
Countless sunrises and sunsets since then had passed.
Her grave seldom saw any visitor as it was ownerless!
Kiều’s heart was already filled with some prior melancholy.
After hearing the story, her pearl teardrops started to fall profusely.
“Alas! How painful is the destiny of a woman!
It’s said that an unhappy fate is our common lot.
Alas! How pitiless the Creator is!
To lay waste to a maiden’s youth and wither her beauty.
When alive, she is the wife of many a man.
When dead, she becomes a ghost with not a single husband!
Where are her ardent lovers now?
Where are those beauty-craving admirers?
As there is no one to think of her,
I will burn a few incense sticks.
Call it a meeting of sympathetic hearts on the road.
Hopefully, she in the underworld will know.”
She muttered prayers in tones high and low.
Then made a bow before leaving the grave.
Under the twilight, the grass was withered.
The wind blew lightly through the shivering weeds.
She pulled down a silver brooch from her hair.
And carved on the tree a four-line, three-rhyme stanza.
Then, as if falling into a state of enchantment,
she stood motionless and lost herself in thought.
Her lovely face turned sad and pensive.
Immersed in sorrow, streams of pearly tears kept falling.
Vân said, “My sister, you are ridiculous
to have spare teardrops to weep for people of long ago.”
Kiều replied, “Since time immemorial,
the cruelty of Fate has never spared any woman.
Just thinking of this makes me grieve.
Seeing her lying there, I wonder what is in store for my future?”
Quan cut in, “My dear sister,
Each line you speak gets harder and harder on the ears.
The atmosphere here is spirit-heavy and gloomy.
Evening shadow descending and the way home still far.”
Kiều said: “Those talented elites,
Their bodies may perish, but their spiritual essences will persist.
Who knows if kindred souls will not together meet?
Wait a little while, she may show herself soon.”
The words barely spoken with no forthcoming reply
when a strong whirlwind suddenly from nowhere arose.
Violently, it shook the trees, causing flowers and leaves to fall.
And threw whiffs of perfume in the air.
Following the path the whirlwind took ,
they saw fresh and clear footprints on the moss.
On seeing this, everyone was a little terrified.
Kiều spoke: “This’s the power of true faith and trust.
Sympathetic souls are bound to meet each other.
If we are to be sisters, care not that we are from different worlds.”
In heartfelt gratitude to Đạm Tiên for showing her presence,
Kiều added to the recent verses a few more lines.
Her sensitive heart was full of feelings and inspiration.
On the foot of the tree, an old-style poem was inscribed.
While half-wanting to stay, half-wanting to leave,
a sweet melody from somewhere approached near.
Seemed to be a young scholar riding on a horse,
at a leisurely pace with hand loosened on the reins.
Half a pocket of dreamer’s moon and poet’s wind.
With a couple of pageboys following him.
His coat had a light scent of fresh grass,
its hue was that of the blue sky.
His horse was the color of snow-white.
From afar, he had seen their faces.
He dismounted and walked towards them.
As the scholar’s shoes moved over the grass meadow,
the whole area seemed to be jade branches with gems’ glow.
Quan knew him and came forward to greet.
The two beauties, from maidenly shyness, behind the flowers, hid.
Actually, he is not really a stranger.
He’s Kim Trọng, a descendant of a noble line.
His family’s wealthy, his genius well-recognized.
Famed for his literary skill, endowed with god-given intelligence.
He’s blessedly gifted and extraordinarily handsome.
When at home, he is kind and courteous.
When going out, he is winsome and generous.
In fact, he lived in the same vicinity
and was a schoolmate of Vương Quan.
Having long heard that his neighbor
has two beautiful daughters,
like the two Kiều of olden times,
locked up in the Bronze Sparrow Tower.
Only a few houses apart, but mountains and rivers lie in between.
For quite some time, his heart’s filled with love and dreams.
A fortunate day to finally meet these angels.
He’s satisfied to see the heavenly fragrant flowers.
From afar, he had seen their figures.
Spring orchid and autumn daisy,
both are heart-captivating beauties.
A meeting between a national beauty and a genius.
Inwardly, they have fallen in love with each other,
but outwardly, still showing shyness and reserve.
His mind hazy as if half-awake, half in a dream.
Staying long not suitable, but leaving so difficult.
The evening light seemed to hasten the parting’s sadness.
The scholar already on the horse and moving away,
the beauty’s still gazing for a long while afterward.
Under the bridge, the streamlet’s crystal clear water flowed.
By the bridge, willows swayed gracefully in the evening shadows…
When Kiều returned home to her maiden chamber,
the sun had set behind the mount’n, the town’s dusk gongs
had sounded. The slanted moon peeps through the window.
Golden moonlight rippled on the water.
The terrace filled with the trees’ shadows.
Camellia tree drooped its flowers over the neighbor’s house.
The dewdrops hung heavily on the swaying branches.
Alone by herself, gazing at the moon,
Kiều’s heart’s filled with recent events and faraway anxieties:
“If a person’s life has such an ending,
a lavish city life is but a life wasted.
Whence he came and to what end that we should meet each other?
In this life, will there be some chance for us to be together?”
With a heart full of hundreds of threads of feelings,
Kiều composed a beautiful poem to express her state of being.
As the waning moon showed its slanted shape through the curtain,
leaning against the sill, Kiều fell into a slumber.
Suddenly, out of nowhere, appeared a young and beautiful damsel.
She looked quite graceful with striking elegance.
Her face infused in mist, her skin white like snow.
Small golden lotus feet seemed to glide on the ground.
Sometimes coming closer, sometimes moving farther away…
In joyful surprise, Kiều welcomed her:
“Coming from the fairyland, which astray path leads you here?”
She replied: “Those of the same temperament and situation
We had met just earlier today, have you already forgotten?
My poor abode is westward of your house.
Above it is a bridge, with water flowing underneath.
My deep thanks for your sympathetic heart.
And for your beautiful verses like gold and pearls.
I told our league’s chief about you.
He told me your name’s also in the ‘Heartbreaking Destiny’ list.
It’s predestined that we should meet.
We are people of the same league, of the same boat!
Here’s ten new poetry themes that’s just posted.
Fairy verses will need your skill with the flower pen.”
Looking over the themes, Kieu consented.
Her fairy hand danced rapidly over the paper,
completing the ten poems in a flash.
After reading the poems, the girl silently praised:
“A beautiful heart with extraordinary poetic skill.
If these poems are in the ‘Heartbreaking Destiny’ book,
she will win the first-prize trophy, yielding to none.”
At the doorway, the girl had turned to leave,
but Kiều still tried to keep her to stay for more heart-to-heart.
When the wind from somewhere suddenly blew on the curtain,
Kiều woke up and realized she was in a dream.
Looking about for the girl but she is neither here nor there.
Although her fragrance still seemed to linger in the air.
All alone, reflecting on this and that in the late night,
she thought of her distant future and became terrified!
A leaf swept by the wind, a flower drifting in the water.
“Would that be my fate in this life?”, she kept mulling over.
Endless waves of innermost feelings swamp her heart.
As she reflected on life’s paths, she started to sob.
Her crying reached her mother’s chamber.
Who woke up and asked, “What is the matter?
Why are you still up at night,
and your flower face wet with tears?”
Kiều replied: “Your little daughter
has not yet repaid filial duties to Father and Mother.
This afternoon, we visited Dam Tien’s grave.
Then tonight, I saw her in a dream.
Mother, what is the ‘Heartbreaking Destiny’ book about?
And those sad themes she gave me to compose poems for.
Based on what happened in the dream,
I think my future will be nothing but dismal.”
Mother taught, “What groundless, absurd dreams!
Why because of nothing put worries and distress into your heart.”
Kiều listened to her mother’s counsel and stopped grieving.
Hardly had sorrow left, she began to think of love.
Outside the window, orioles were gently chirping.
On the side wall, the catkin flew over to neighbor’s house.
The moon casted its slanted shadow on the veranda.
All by herself with inmost thoughts abound, she felt so alone.
It’s well known that for those who are romantics,
who could unravel the threads of love in their hearts?
Since he returned home from the chance meeting,
she was constantly in his thoughts and his feelings.
The more he tried to shake off sorrow, the more it grows.
Like three autumns compressed in a day, it was drearily slow.
Heavy drapes shrouded her window like a wall of clouds.
Each night, he dreamed of a glimpse of her at her house.
A month had already passed by.
Depression filled his heart.
He yearned to see her face but could not.
His study room had the cold feel of metal.
Ink brush tips dried, lute strings out of tune.
A light wind blew through the blinds, creating a nostalgic melody.
Fragrance aroused longing, tea lacked its usual taste.
If it has not predestined love for three lives,
why such heavenly beauty to tease one’s heart?
Feeling wistful for the special place of first meeting her,
he left his house hurriedly to go there.
The place now covered with lush green grass.
Clear water flowed under the bridge,
but nothing else about her to see!
The evening breeze seemed to invoke melancholy.
The lonely reeds swaying in mocking affirmation.
A sudden desire to see her filled his heart.
He hurriedly headed towards the Blue Bridge to her house.*
Deep and austere-looking, with closed gates and high walls.
So ended the chance of seeing and talking with her.
Leaves of willows drooping, forming a natural curtain.
An oriole chirped mockingly from a tree branch.
Behind several closed gates, somewhere was her chamber.
The front yard was filled with fallen flowers,
but she is nowhere to be seen.
He stood there for a long while, then strolled around.
Suddenly he saw: behind the backyard, there is a house.
It belonged to Việt Ngô, a businessman.
The owner’s away and the house’s empty.
He rented it as a student from another town.
With his lute, books and belongings, he moved into the place.
The landscaping’s in a good state with grass, rocks, and trees.
A terrace named “View Thúy” in golden letters still fresh.
Joyful of such a happy coincidence,
He wished, “It must be Love ordained by Heaven.”
From his room window,
he kept watching the eastern wall each day.
So near to her, yet it seemed like ten thousand miles away.
For the fairy cave was closed even to the wind.
It’s now two full moons since he would moved in.
And yet, not even, of her shadow, a single glimpse.
One serene day, looking over the wall,
he saw a graceful figure flitting by the peach tree.
He put down his lute, tidied his dress, and rushed out.
The perfume still lingered strongly, but she was gone.
He walked around the wall.
On the peach tree lay a silver hair brooch.
He stretched his hand and took it home.
“From which maiden’s chamber came this?
It must be she to have this precious thing.
If not a predestined love, it would not be this easy
to fall into one’s hands!”
Lying sleepless, he kept fondling the brooch.
It still had her lingering scent…
At early dawn, Kim saw her, when the fog’s just cleared.
By the wall, she seemed a little puzzled as she searched far and near.
Kim has been waiting for her to appear all night.
He raised his voice over the wall to sound out her mind:
“A silver brooch I have just found. How would one know,
for the pearl to be returned, where’s Union Town?”
From the other side, Kiều replied: “I am grateful
for a gentleman’s heart that does not care for dropped things.
The brooch’s worth only a few farthings.
But the noble-heartedness of a gentleman is highly esteemed.”
Kim replied: “We are close neighbors.
Just next door and not at all distant strangers.
A chance fortune for me to find a lost brooch
to compensate for the sorrow in my heart all this time.
It would been so long for me to wait for this day. Please stay awhile
to converse and let us get to know one another better.”
He hurriedly went back and take a few things from his room.
A velvet piece of cloth with two golden bracelets from his heirlooms.
With a ladder, he stealthily climbed over the wall.
Is she not the very person he met that day!
On recognizing him, she became shy and a little embarassed.
He gazed at her, while she shyly bowed her head.
Kim said: “Since our chance encounter at the festival,
My heart’s been longing for you all this time.
Lovesickness’s wearing my body thin.
If I just wait, who knows if there would be a today!
A full month already passed by since we met,
I had to dare for a chance to see and talk with you.
And now, do please grant me this:
Would a noble pedestaled mirror shine on a humble duckweed?”
After a while, she hesitantly replied:
“My family’s poor but our ways are snow-pure.
Even if two persons are in love with one another,
Its outcome will depend on father and mother.
I am grateful for your affection.
I am but a child and do not know really what to reply.”
Kim said: “Yesterday’s windy, tomorrow may be rainy.
A spring day like this does not, by any chance, come easy.
Even if you do not consider my infatuation,
it’s bad for me but is it of use to anyone?
We could first bind our affection.
And then form a plan of action.
Even if God does not take pity on our love,
We will dare to let go of our spring of youth in this life.
If your heart insists on being so strict,
my efforts for your love, would it not be very wasted?”
Quietly listening to his sweet words, gentle like a lullaby,
feelings of love reflected in the shyness of her eyes.
She said: “This’s a new and strange day.
Respecting your feelings for me,
my heart can not bear to withstand your affection.
As I have received love from a true-hearted gentleman,
you have my golden vow of faithful love henceforth.”
On hearing her words, the anxiety knots in Kim’s heart were gone.
He took out the brooch, pink cloth and put them into her hands.
Saying: “A lifetime of our relationship starts from this day.
These are the tokens to mark our love.”
In her hand was already a velvet cloth, and a silk fan.
With her hairpin, they immediately exchanged gifts. *
Their love vows were scarcely spoken,
when from the back of the house, voices were heard.
Hurriedly they left, brushing against leaves and flowers.
He returned to his study room, and she departed from her chamber.
Since they shared their feelings for each other,
love in their hearts became deeper,
and their minds often wandered.
The Longing River, although not very wide,
each side kept thinking and waiting for the other side.
A wall lay in between with blocking snow and hiding fog.
It’s hard for them to have news of each other.
Windy days and moonlit nights gradually passed by.
With summer’s lush green, spring was over.
Today’s birthday on her mother’s family side.
Her parents, brother, and sister will be going to the party.
A bustling day, dressing up and preparing for the trip.
To present a gift with sincere best wishes.
Alone by herself in the house,
Kiều thought the opportunity to meet Kim has been left for today.
She prepared delicacies and fruits in her chamber.
Then walked quickly to the dividing wall.
She just scarcely called out in a low tone his name.
To find that he was already, by the flowers, waiting.
He complained that she has been lukewarm to him.
To let their love relationship be cold for so long.
His heart’s been alternating between longings and sorrows.
Half of his head will soon become white with fog and snow.
She replied: “The wind kept me, the rain detained me.
I am sorry for letting you down all this time.
But today, no one’s at home.
I come out here to return with gratitude your affection.”
She then walked around the garden’s miniature mountain.
At the wall’s end, there is a gate that’s just fenced.
She rolled up her sleeves and opened the gate, then
pushed the clouds aside to see clearly the way to fairyland.
Their faces brightened as they look at each other.
Greeting wishes were said, and inquiries about health and weather.
Shoulder to shoulder, they walked back to his study room.
Conversing about poetry and their love vows by mountain and river.
On a side table, lay various ink cups and pen brushes.
Hanging on the wall was a painting of cedar trees. Their strengths
and exposure to wind and fog were expressed naturally.
As she gave praises for the brush strokes, the more she looked,
the more vibrantly fresh she found them to be.
Kim said: “The painting was drawn just a little while ago.
Please grace it with a few words to enhance its beauty.”
Her fairy hand flew quickly like the blowing wind, the falling rain.
On the painting, soon appeared a new quatrain.
Kim praised: “Your thoughts flow in gems.
Even Miss Ban, Miss Tạ are not equal to that! *
If in previous lifetimes, had I not done a lot of good things,
I would not have the happiness of being together with you.”
She replied: “Just from a hidden glance of your face,
I think that if you will not become a royal court’s member,
then at least you will be an honored official.
As for me, my fate’s thin like a grasshopper.
Do not know if God will grant us a future together.
I remembered when I was young and naive,
there was a fortuneteller who said to me:
‘When talent and beauty outwardly exudes in full glamour,
An unhappy fate’s in store for its owner.’
Looking at you and now thinking of me,
One’s thick, one’s thin, should we really be together?”
Kim replied: “Destiny give us our chance encounter.
Since ancient times, stories of human willpower
overcoming their fates are many.
If we face unsurmountable difficulties
then we will dare to risk our lives.”
They talked about many big and small things.
Hearts in love, feeling light and happy with several drinks.
The joyous day’s too short, not even a full hand’s size.
The sun already set beyond the west sky.
It then seemed not quite proper to stay overly long.
She reluctantly said goodbye and headed for home.
On arriving home, she heard the news:
Her parents still at the party and will not return for the night.
She let down her room’s door curtain,
then walked hurriedly through the night garden.
The moon, shining on the treetops, casted thick and thin shadows.
The oil lamp in Kim’s study room weakly flickered…
Resting against a table, Kim started to doze.
Half awake, half drunk with wine and love.
Her lotus footsteps echoed in his sleep.
The moonlight waned, the pear flower approaching near.
Still wistful for a mountain fairy’s love for a human king,
Kieu’s sudden arrival appeared to be in a loving dream.
Kiều said, “In the empty silence of the night,
‘cause of flower I have to dare a path to find flower.
Now, we see each other, face-to-face, clearly.
Who knows if some tomorrow, it will not be just a dream?”
Kim was overjoyed, and with ceremony, he invited her in.
He put more oil in the lotus lamp, and burned some incense.
Then, they together composed the love vows onto paper.
With the silver knife, she cut and give him strands of her hair.
The moon was shining brightly in the sky.
They spoke their vows together as if of one mind.
Then they asked many little things in the other’s heart.
And promised for their entire life to love and be faithful to each other.
As they drank and talked into the night,
he became aroused by her fragrance and her mirror’s reflection.
Kim said, “Gentle breeze in a clear moonlit night.
For a long time, there is still in my heart a little unsatisfied.
I have not yet brought the jade pestle to the Blue Bridge. *
I am afraid it may sound improper, this wish?”
She replied, “Like the stories of red marriage-binding threads,
a vow’s sufficient to bind us to each other.
Just do not ask for anything indecent.
Other than that, I would not regret obliging you anything.”
Kim said, “I heard of your famous talent at the moon lute.
If my Zhong Ziqi ears can have the pleasure of hearing you play.” *
She replied, “Just a small talent, of little worth.
But since you ask, I will gladly obey.”
On the wall, a moon lute’s already hanging. Kim hurriedly
took it down, and raised it to the level of his eyebrows.
Kiều said, “This’s just a petty and private talent of mine.
Your high regards make my heart feels burdened and surprised.”
She started with the tuning of the lute.
Adjusting the four strings to their musical tone scales.
Whence the melody that revives the Han, Chu battlefields,
the sounds of steel swords clashing can be heard.
Whence the melody of Ssu-Ma’s Love Plea for Phoenix,
is not there a tinge of bitterness and sorrow?
Here’s Kuang-Ling melody composed by Chi Kang.
Its music: flowing like a river, floating like the clouds.
Here’s Chao-Chun’s melody on crossing the country’s border.
Half’s longings for the king, half’s for her home.
Clear like the sound of a crane flying by.
Thick like the waterfall in the middle of its descent.
Unhurried like a gentle breeze passing outside the door.
Quick and hurried like it is raining hard and heavy.
The oil lamp sometimes bright, sometimes dark.
Making the person sitting there also feels sad.
Sometimes he rested his elbows on his knees.
Sometimes he bowed his head.
Sometimes his insides felt all twisted up.
Sometimes his eyebrows curled up in a frown.
He said, “It’s good, exceedingly good.
But it is so full of bitterness and sorrow.
Why play such a mournful piece
to make your heart heavy and the listener’s unsettled.”
Kiều replied, “A bad habit I am accustomed to.
Sad or joyous, it is my endowed nature, what can I do!
But your words are golden advice, I will keep them in my heart.”
Kim said: “Please do try to make it less bitter and distressful.”
Her flower scent became increasingly fragrant in the night.
Gazing into her sparkling eyes, his love turned into fire.
Waves of desire swept through his heart.
As he cuddled her, his growing lust began to show.
Kiều said, “Do not treat our love as a game.
Please stand away from me and let me finish my say.
Nothing so precious about a mere peach blossom flower
The peach garden does not dare to fence itself from the blue birds.
But as you want me to be your future wife,
the rules of good-wife ethics put chastity first.
If a woman’s easy with granting sexual favors,
then who would ever want to marry her.
Love relationship’s not a temporary eat-then-leave place.
The chastity of a lifetime, how can one forsake it in a day!
Think of notable love stories from the past to the present.
Which couples are better matched than Tsui and Chang.
Pre-marriage sex had destroyed their love for each other.
She obliged him too much, so he got tired of her.
Even while they were together and passionately in love,
he looked down on her in his heart.
the West Chamber grows cold with broken vows,
turning an affectionate love into a shameful one.
If a lady fights to protect her chastity against her future husband,
when theyare married, she would feel ashamed, and because of whom?
Please! Why hurry in making demands for sexual pleasure.
While I am alive, I promise one day you will get your due.”
Upon hearing her sweet and virtuous words,
she gained his respect to the fullest.
As the silver moonlight turned pale along the roof eaves,
they heard someone urgently calling from outside the front gate.
She hurried back to her chamber,
while Kim rushed across the peach flower yard.
As soon the brushwood gate got opened,
a young family servant came in with a letter from home,
and brought news of Kim’s uncle’s death while living abroad.
Kim’s father bade him to go to Liao-Yang,
a distant land beyond the hills and valleys,
to bring back his uncle’s remains and help in the obsequies.
The news completely astounded Kim.
He quickly went to Kieu’s house,
to tell her in detail the entire story
of his uncle’s death, his duties in the family mourning,
and his feelings on being far away:
“We have only been a few times together.
Yet now, we have to part from each other.
No chance for us yet to tie the marriage silk threads,
but the moon that we exchanged our love oaths by,
will always be up there, watching us from the far sky.
When I am thousands of leagues away,
each day without you will be like three winters!
Alas! When will the threads of my grief be unraveled!
Please do take precious care of yourself, my love!
So I, at the world’s ends, can be at ease.”
On hearing those words, her heartstrings entangled in knots.
Mood uncertain, she expressed her feelings and thoughts:
“The god of nuptials, why does he hate us so!
The joy of union not yet felt, the sorrow of parting already suffered.
Together, we made a sacred oath. Though my hair
will turn gray one day, my love for you will always stay.
It matters not if I have to wait months and years.
I only grieve for your journey’s hardships.
We had pledged to each other a unanimous heart.
This life, I will never play my lute abroad another man’s boat.
As long as mountains and rivers still exist,
come back, remembering her who’s with you today.”
Lingering hands in hands, not wanting to part
till the sun stood directly above the roof.
Each footstep taking them farther apart,
each farewell inciting streams of tears.
In haste, Kim saddled his horse and tied his bags.
They parted ways, with their grief split into half.
Feeling sad as he looked at the foreign landscape.
On the tree branches, many cuckoos gathered.
At the sky’s horizon, only some swallows.
Grief for him, who journeys through wind and rain.
Each day, longings of love weighed down the heart.
While she was still standing against the west porch,
her heartstrings twisted like entangled silk threads.
Through the window, she gazed at the mists and beyond.
She saw a washed-out flower; a willow gaunt and pale yellow.
Agitated, she paced back and forth in the house
when the party attendees returned from the birthday feast.
Exchanges about health and such were barely started
when burst in a noisy bunch of bailiffs.
Some holding cudgels, others wielding long knives.
A mob of “buffalo-headed”, “horse-faced” fiends
rushing around like berserks.
They put cangues on the old man and his young son.
And tied the two together with a cruel rope.
Like a bunch of green flies buzzing all around the house,
they smashed the workbaskets and shattered the looms.
They sacked the household thoroughly clean
of jewelry, finery and personal things,
to fill up their pockets of greed.
From nowhere calamity had struck, but who had caused it all?
Who had set the snare and sprung the trap?
Upon inquiry, it was later learned
some rogue of a raw silk seller
brought a charge against Kieu’s father.
The whole household was taken aback with alarm.
Cries of innocence shook the earth,
the case’s injustice dimmed the clouds.
All day, they kneeled and begged for justice and mercy.
But deaf ears have no pity, and cruel hands only blows.
Father and son were hanged upside down on the beam.
Even rocks would have broke, much less men.
Their faces looked painful and frightened.
This wrong can only be appealed to the faraway heaven.
Today shows no strange behavior of those lawmen
to wreak dire havoc on families just for the sake of money.
Kiều thought: “What can I do to save my blood folks?
When calamity strikes, one must act accordingly.
A fated meeting of hearts, her parents’ birth and care labors.
Love and filial duty, which one weighs heavier?
I will put aside the vows of love.
A child must first pay the debts of birth and care.”
Her mind resolved, she then said:
“I will sell myself for father’s ransom money!”
There was an elderly notary surnamed Chung,
who also worked for the law-and-order bureau
but somehow has a kind heart.
Witnessing her act of filial gratitude and love,
he felt a secret compassion for her plight.
To clear the path of obstacles with payments and bribes,
he reckoned that three hundred liangs is needed.
For now, he would have her kinsfolk freed,
and told her to provide the sum within two days or three.
Pity the child, so young and naive.
Misfortune, like a windstorm, fell upon her suddenly.
Her heart pained with parting from Kim in life and death.
But even her life and sacrifice she does not regret,
How can she regret giving up love.
Just as a raindrop does not care about its poor fate,
she will sacrifice herself to save her father,
like a blade of grass that repays three months of spring.
Matchmakers were told of her situation.
Rumors of it stirred noisy gossips near and far.
In a nearby neighborhood, there was a woman,
who brought a suitor from some distant town.
When his name asked, he answered, “Scholar Mã.”
Of his hometown, “Lin-ching district, near here.”
He looked to be over fourty.
His face smooth-shaven, his clothes well groomed.
Master and servants behind came bustling in.
Led by the matchmaker into the house.
With no manners, he grabbed the best seat
while the matchmaker bade Kieu to come out.
Feeling sullen from her family’s woe and her own grief,
with each step on the floor, her tears flowed in streams.
Like a delicate creature afraid of the humidity and chilly wind,
she felt ashamed to look at flowers,
or see her face in the mirror, so brazen without shame.
The matchmaker smoothed her hair and held her hands.
Kiều has the sadness of a daisy flower,
and the slenderness of an apricot blossom.
The suitor pondered over her beauty and talents.
He asked her to play the moon lute,
and write some verses on a fan.
Many charms she had, and he relished them all.
Well pleased, he started to bargain for a deal.
He said, “To buy jade, I have come to Blue Bridge.
Please tell me how much is the bridal gift’s price.”
The broker answered: “Worth a thousand liangs of gold.
But with sudden family misfortune,
they will look to your generosity.”
They haggled the price many times over small amounts.
After a long while, a deal was struck.
The price for her: four hundred and some liangs.
All was smooth sailing after that.
As pledges, they exchanged cards
that contain the names and ages of the betrothed.
And set the dates for the delivery of bridal gifts and the wedding.
With cash ready on hand, what can not be resolved!
Words was sent to old Chung asking for help.
At his request, old Vuong can go home on probation.
Pity for the old father and his young child.
Looking at her with a distressed heart, he uttered:
“Raising a daughter, you wishes she might find
a fitting match, a worthy husband at her side.
O Heaven! Why inflict on us such calamity?
Who slandered us to tear apart our family?
These old bones of mine do not mind the ax,
but my child’s ordeal agonizes my heart.
Death occurs just once, either now or later.
I would rather die than to suffer so!”
After those words, he shed more tears.
Then tried to knock his head against the wall.
They rushed to hold him back and watched over him.
She tried to soothe him with consoling words:
“What is she worth, this daughter of yours,
who had not paid one bit her debts of birth and care.
Petitioning for the king’s pardon, Miss Ying made me feel ashamed.
How can I fall short of Miss Li who sold herself?
As a tree gets much older,
it still has to support so many branches.
If you can not bear to let me go,
I fear a storm will destroy our family.
Rather sacrifice only me.
One flower torn, but the tree’s leaves stay green.
Whatever my fate is, I will accept.
Think of me as a blossom fallen in its early budding days.
Do not worry uselessly or entertain any wild notions in your head.
It will only wreck our family and destroy yourself.”
Her sensible words went soothingly into his ears.
Looking at each other, their eyes filled with tears.
Meanwhile, Scholar Mã had just appeared again.
After the contract got signed, the gold then changed hand.
How cruel the old moon matrimony god is!
Without selecting, he randomly ties many two persons together
as couples with his matrimony threads.
With money in one’s hand, it has no difficult task
to sway people’s heart and turn black into white.
Old Chung exerted a lot of efforts to help out.
Gifts were presented, and the case quickly finished.
Family affairs had been, more or less, settled.
But now, drawing near is the time of the bridal hour.
Alone by herself by the midnight lamp,
with tear-soaked gown and hair weaved with sorrow:
I am resigned to my fate, whatever it may be.
I just feel grieved for him who would persevered in loving me.
His effort to win my love is so remarkable and touching.
But since my acceptance of his love, his life will be left dangling.
The cup of pledge wine not yet fully dried,
but now I break my oath and and betray his love.
In faraway Liao-Yang, he could never have thought
that the thread of love had been, by my own hand, cut short.
So many vows of love we gave one another.
But since my fate is like that, they will amount to nothing.
The oath incense would still linger to my next life.
I will be reborn a horse or buffalo, serving him to make amends.
Until my debt of love to him is repaid,
my heart, upon death, will turn into an unfullfiled-love-crystal,
that will not melt away when I pass to the underworld.
She was so engrossed in her intimate thoughts,
as the lamp oil burned away, and tears soaked up her handkerchief.
Thúy Vân suddenly woke up from her sleep.
Under the lamplight, she approached Kiều and solicitously inquired:
“Heaven’s scheme is capricious and ever-changing
with mulberry-field-covered-by-sea events.
For the whole family, you suffered alone, my dear sister,
the injustice of fate. But why do you stay awake the whole night?
Is there some secret that’s troubling your heart?”
Kiều answered: “My heart is weeping
for a predestined relationship that’s still not finished.
It’s embarrassing to talk about it,
but if I keep it hidden in my heart,
it would be a betrayal of trust and love.
I ask for your help, should you agree…
Please sit down and let me bow to you before I speak.”
“My bond of love with him, midway, are severed.
I will depend on you to rejoin the remaining silk threads.
From the time we met, I gave Kim my fan in pledge,
and we drank from the same cup of wine
when we made the vows to love each other our entire life.
Then out of nowhere, a ferocious storm struck our family.
Love and filial duty just can not both be fulfilled.”
“You have many long days of spring ahead.
Being sisters from the same bloodline,
please take my place and redeem my pledge.
If when my bones and flesh would have turned into dust,
I will still smile with joy in Hades,
and breathe the fragrance of your happiness.
These bracelets and pledge on clouds-decorated paper
are jointly ours to keep.
When you and Kim become wife and husband
and you feel sad for a star-crossed girl,
who had vanished from this world,
then the lute and oath incense are your keepsakes.
Some day, if ever, you play the moon lute
or burn the oath incense and you see
a light breeze wafting back and forth
among the grass and the leaves,
then you know that it is me,
your sister, coming home.
“My soul will keep holding on to the oath.
Even after death, I will try to repay him my debt of love.
In the dark underworld, I can not be seen or heard.
Please sprinkle a cup of water for an ill-fated soul.
Now the brooch broken, the vase shattered.
Words can not express just how much I love him.
Please convey him, the lord of my heart,
my thousand bows of regrets
that our times together, so few and so short, is only thus much.
O Why! Why is my fate brown as dirt!
Like a flower doomed to drift along the stream.
O Kim! O My dearest Kim!
This is the end! From this time onwards,
I will have betrayed your trust!”
Right after saying those words, she fell into a swoon.
Her breath absent, both hands cold as ice.
The parents was awakened from their deep sleep.
The entire household was astir inside and out.
They bustled about, fetching and giving her remedies.
At last, Kiều wakened, her face still wet with tears.
They asked her the reasons for her unusual behavior.
She kept on sobbing, not knowing how or what to say.
Vân then told Kiều’s secret in whispers:
“These are the bracelets, here’s the written pledge…”
Her father said, “’Cause of dad, your marriage plan is destroyed.
Well then, your pledge will be fulfilled by your sister in your stead.
Whose fault is it that young lovers must part, that my child
must now lead the life of a drifting duckweed, a wandering cloud?
Even if the stone stelae were worn out,
I shall not fail to carry out your heart’s wish.”
She made a deep bow, then said softly, “Thanks to dad,
I will thus be able to repay my debt of gratitude for his love.
Now it does not matter to me to live a servant’s life.
Even if my bones are buried in some distant land, I do not care.”
Kiều’s extreme grief is hard to express while the south tower’s bell
had tolled several times throughout the night.
A nuptial carriage already arrived outside, with an orchestra
playing strings and flutes, as if to urge the loved ones to part.
She felt pained to leave them, they felt pained to stay behind.
Fallen tears penetrated the stone steps.
The pain of a silkworm forcibly separated from its silk threads.
Across the sky, ominous clouds suddenly dragged in darkness.
Blades of grass drooped, tree branches soaked with dew.
She was brought to a guest house,
where she was kept alone within the four walls.
She felt shy and afraid on this night,
but upon dwelling on her plight,
her heart became bitter and more bitter:
“A divine flower lay fallen in vulgar hands
A waste of my effort to keep it, for his sake, from rain and sunshine.
Had I known that my life would sunk this low,
I would rather I had given my chastity to my true love.
For whom did I fence the flower from the east (spring) wind.
I make him suffer now since I had refused him.
If we should ever meet again in this world,
what has left of this soiled body of mine to offer.
As I was born to a hard lot,
how could one keep living the life of a beauty?
Upon the table lay a knife.
She took it and with her scarf, hid it inside.
In anticipation of when the flood water reached my heels,
this knife will then take care of my fate.
The autumn night gradually wore on, minute by minute.
In a vague melancholy, Kiều was half dreaming and half wakeful.
She did not know that Scholar Mã was a rogue.
One well experienced with the affairs of love and lust.
The rogue partied too much and had a string of bad luck.
Used to the smell of brothels, he went there to seek his bread.
In a certain brothel, there ruled a Madam Tú.
A former harlot, old age had taken away her youthful charms.
By chance they met and soon became partners.
Cast in the same mold, they were a pair of trickster and swindler.
They teamed up to open a year-round shop
that sells young girls to pleasure-seeking customers.
Across country and town, they sought for young preys to catch.
Under the name of buying maidservants or concubines.
But in reality, the girls would be taught the trade of a harlot:
the games of pleasure, the art of love.
Good or ill, one’s fortune is determined by the heavens.
The heartbreaking-destiny list’s just added another unlucky person.
Pity the fate of a young beautiful girl.
A beautiful flower sold into the boat of a peddler.
The poor girl was caught inside their trap:
Cheap bridal gifts, and a rushed wedding.
Mã secretly rejoiced: “The flag has come into my hand!
The more I look at her, the greater is my desire.
A kingdom’s queen of beauty imbued with heavenly fragrance.
One smile of her is worth a thousand liangs of gold, indeed.”
To be the one to pluck the flower’s virginity,
princes and noble patrons will vie against each other.
The price should be no less than three hundred liangs.
It should cover her cost, and thereafter, is profit.
Dangling in front of me is a mouth-watering tidbit.
Although I hate to lose money, I crave the heavenly beauty.
The divine peach fruit within a mortal’s grasp,
I will pick it from the branch and taste it to satiate my hunger!
Under this sky, in the pleasure-seeking world,
how many men who enjoy flowers really know about flower.
Pomegranate peel and cockscomb blood
can heal it up and restore appearance of virginity.
In the dim light, not many who would not be deceived.
Virgin or not, she will fetch the same price, so we lose nothing.
If the old broad finds out and gets angry,
it’s just the effort of one night kneeling on my knees.
Besides, it is still a long, long way from home.
If I continue to do nothing, she will get suspicious.
How regrettable for the camellia flower!
The bee now know its ways in and out.
It was a heavy storm of wind and rain,
with neither compassion for flawless jade,
nor concern for pristine fragrance.
This spring night was all one bad dream.
She woke up and lay alone under the cold nuptial torch light.
Her tears poured down like rain.
Hatred for him, and loathing for her soiled body:
“What breed of creature is he, so foul and disgusting.
My so esteemed body now is a dishonor of the elegant female sex.
It’s over. Nothing left for me to hope and expect.
A life like this is a life finished.”
Disappointed in love, sorry for her fate,
She took out her knife and thought to kill herself.
She mulled it over: “If I were alone, dying would not matter.
But there is two loved ones to consider.
Whatever problem occurs afterwards,
an official investigation may cause serious woes for my parents.
My situation will likely ease with time.
Sooner or later, everyone dies just once.”
While she weighed the pros and cons back and forth,
the sounds of roosters’ crowings resounded around the wall.
As the watchtower’s horn blew through the morning mists,
Mã came and hastened the departure.
How heartbreaking it was, the hour of parting!
Horses’ hooves trotting away, carriage’s shadow jolting.
Ten miles beyond the town, at a resting post,
Old Vuong gave a feast to bid farewell.
While hosts and guests were making cheers outside,
Mother and Kiều were grieving together indoors.
They looked at each other through streams of tears.
She then whispered her mind to her mother’s ears.
“Being just a young and helpless girl, I feel ashamed!
Till what future life can I repay father’s and mother’s love and care.
No hopes for a speck of clean dust trapped in muddied water.
I will leave my heart here with you for life, oh Mother.
Judging by what I would seen these past few days,
I think I have fallen into the hands of an old scoundrel!
When we got there, he left me all alone.
When coming in, he tarries. When going out, he is in a hurry.
When speaking, he makes blunders.
Master and servants looks down on each other.
Quite a different bearing from that of a gentleman.
It seemed like he has some kind of a merchant.
What else is there to say?
On some foreign land, your daughter’s doomed to live.
And upon death, she would be buried in soil unnative.”
Upon hearing those words, Madam Vương
let out a shrieking cry for injustice that wants to pierce the heaven.
After drinking together a few moments,
although the farewell cup not yet empty,
Mã went out and gave orders for the coach to leave.
Heart heavy with love and compassion for his daughter,
before the coach, Old Vương pleaded with Mã:
“My young and delicate girl,
‘cause of family’s misfortune has come to be your servant.
Henceforth, in some corner of the sea, at some point in the sky’s horizon,
she will live lone days with no kinsfolk in a foreign land.
Within the shadow of you, a lofty pine tree,
please protect the small clinging vine from frost and snow.”
To these words, the bridegroom replied:
“Our feet are bound together with red silk threads.
No matter how our lives may turn out in the future,
let the sun and moon be my witness,
if I should betray her trust, the demons’ knives will draw my blood.”
Like a stormy wind under the cloudy sky,
the coach sped off with whirling dust as if it wants to fly.
Wiping their tears, they kept gazing
on that horizon, for days and nights.
She traveled far and far into unknown lands.
Saw bridges white with frost and hills dark with clouds.
Shivering reeds huddled together with the north wind’s cold breath.
An autumn sky just for her and her alone.
On a quiet night road that stretched into the far distance,
the sight of the moon aroused Kiều’s shame of her vows.
In the autumn woods - layers of green interlaid with red,
the bird cries reminded her of her parents.
Through many unknown mountains and streams,
Lin-Tzu took one full month to arrive.
As the carriage stopped before the entrance gate,
she saw a person immediately walked out.
At first glance, one would notice her skin’s pallid.
What does she feed on to be so bulky, so tall and big?
Before the coach, with wanton cheerfulness, she gave greetings.
At her bidding, Kiều meekly went inside the house.
On one side were some girls with finely trimmed eyebrows.
On the other were seated some playboys, about four or five.
In between was an altar, and above it
hanged a statue with white eyebrows.
By the customs of the brothels since ancient times,
this profession has for patron this fellow.
Day and night, they worship him with incense and flowers.
When some jinxed gal has two few customers,
in front of him, she would take off her dress,
burns incense and mumbles some prayers.
She would then take the altar flowers and put them under her mat.
Then butterflies would come all around her in swarms.
Confused, not aware of what it was,
Kieu knelt down as told; the bawd then prayed:
“May this shop’s business thrive with fortune’s blessings.
That each day and night is a festive celebration.
May all men who see her love her,
and come flocking like orioles and swallows.
May love letters and appointments be aplenty.
To show one satisfied customer out the front door,
and welcome a new one from the back.”
Strange words to Kieu’s ears, she did not understand.
She vaguely realized that something was very amiss.
After another ceremony of the ancestral altar,
Dame Tú installed herself cross-legged on the bed.
She ordered: “Kowtow to your mother here,
then go and kowtow to your uncle over there.”
Kiều said: “By misfortune, I am living a drifting-duckweed life,
separated from my kin.
With my humble lot, I am resigned to the role of a concubine.
For what reason is an oriole turned into a swallow?
I am too young and inexperienced to know what my real status is.
All the usual marriage ceremonies were celebrated.
Bridal presents, nuptial rites, wedding procession and all.
We live together and had shared intimacy between spouses.
But now, you have changed the roles and ranks.
Please allow me to ask you for a few words of clarification.
After hearing her words, the woman understood what would happened.
She then flew into a furious rage:
“It’s so plainly obvious.
She took away my husband alive.
I told him to go and bring some lass back here,
And put her to work as a hostess to help us earn our bread.
But that unfaithful knave! That inhuman rogue!
With his damn lust, he had to play with her first.
Now that her virginity is no more,
It’s over! Over! The money that I would put up had gone to hell!
You there had been sold to me.
In my house, you have to live by my rules.
When that old man tried to take you with his dirty trick,
why did not you slap his face, but listened to him instead.
Why did you so meekly lie there and submit to his lust?
A young chit, yet did you already have so early an itch to ply your trade?
I must teach you what my rules are!”
Grabbing a whip, she is about to pounce and lash.
“O lofty heavens! O thick earth!”, Kiều cried out,
“My life, I had forsaken the day I left my home.
Well! To finish it, I had nothing more to regret!”
At once, she pulled out the knife hidden in her sleeve.
The bawd was afraid that Kieu had the courage to kill herself.
She was still watching Kieu’s countenance as Kieu stabbed.
Alas, such great beauty and splendid talent!
Is a cruel knife to take away her unfortunate life from this world?
News of her undeserved misfortune broke out noisily near and far.
The house, for once, was fully packed with a crowd of people.
While she lay there all quiet in her deep slumber,
the bawd just stood there, her wits gone, trembling and staring.
Then Kiều was brought to the west wing.
A nurse was assigned to care for her, a doctor called in.
But her ties to this world were not yet finished.
In her sleep, she sensed a girl was standing by her side.
The girl whispered, “Your karma’s not yet done.
How could you escape your debt of heart-rending grief to Life?
Your fate still holds you to a beauty’s misfortunes.
What a human wishes for, Heaven may not allow.
Wait until you fulfill your destiny of a frail reed.
By the Chien-tang river, we two shall again meet.
After a whole day of medicine and care,
Kiều slowly wakened from her deathlike faint.
Dame Tú was waiting by the bed.
With carefully chosen words, she gently coaxed Kiều:
“Every one of us has but one life!
You are a blooming flower with many long spring days ahead.
Somewhere along the line, there has been a mistake.
With your virtuousness, how could I have the heart
to force you into the sexual games of love.
But since your missteps took you here,
lock up your chamber and wait for your nuptial day.
While you still live, your assets remain.
Will find you a worthy husband of good family.
Why lay misfortune on a blameless person?
You not only hurt yourself, but also harm me. What is the point?”
In a soft tone, she spoke her earnest advice in Kiều’s ear.
The right and wrong in what she said seemed very clear.
Besides, there were the words from the spirit in her dream.
Heaven takes a hand in shaping human destiny.
This life, debt has not yet been repaid.
Why wait for debts to pile up in the next life!
She listened in silence to Dame Tú’s plea, then she replied:
“Who would want to have things turned out like this?
If things will be as you said, then I am fortunate.
Will tomorrows keep today’s promise?
I dread when the bees and butterflies make demands.
I would rather die unsullied than to live a life in mud.”
Dame Tú said: “My daughter, have your mind at ease.
I do not have the heart to cheat you for pleasure.
If later, my actions do not match my words,
above our heads, there will be the judge, the sun that shines on us.”
After hearing her solemn oath,
Kiều’s heart was relieved, and she gradually felt better.
Kiều now lived in the Jade Tower with a few friends:
Some distant hills and the nearby moon.
On all four sides into the far distance that she could see:
Some dunes of gold sand, some trails with red dust.
With resigned ennui and shame, her days slowly went by,
from watching dawn clouds to staying awake by the night lamplight.
The scenic view and her feelings divided her heart in two.
She thought of him, the cup of pledge wine under the moonlight.
How he must be longing for news of her each day.
In this corner of the sky, alone on this lost shore,
how would she ever cleanse her tainted heart.
She grieved for those awaiting at the door for her return.
Who would fan her parents now during hot weather,
and keeps them warm them in the cold winter.
After these months of rain and shine, the yard’s catalpa tree
probably big enough to stretch her arms around.
In sadness she watched the harbor at sunset.
Whose boat was it with sails appearing and disappearing far off?
In sadness she watched the river flowing into the sea.
Drifting flowers on the water. Where would they go?
In sadness she watched the vast plain of wilted grass.
A bluish tint where the earth meets the clouds.
In sadness she watched the wind raising eddies in the bay.
The waves were roaring around her seat.
All around her were foreign streams and unknown hills.
An exile’s sorrow inspired her with a few quatrains.
Feeling sorrowed, she let down the beaded curtain.
Then she heard a voice across the wall
speaking some verse with rhymes that match her poem.
He was a young man, in the flush of youth,
well groomed and elegantly dressed.
She thought he also came from a line of gentlefolk.
Upon inquiry, she learned that he has called Sở Khanh.
Upon seeing her beautiful silhouette behind the curtain,
appearing to be heart-smitten, he declared his love:
“Alas! The beauty of a kingdom, the fragrance of heaven’s flower!
Whence and how did she stray to this place?
She has a treasure that should only be found
on the moon or some other cloud palace.
O Flower! Beautiful Flower! How could it be doomed to this
wretched life?
My bosom boils with anger at the unjust old God.
This suffering heart, who will understand me? O my heart!
If the beauty would only recognize my heroic nature,
to free her from her cage is just a child’s play matter.”
The autumn window’s shutters had been closed.
Still echoing in her ears were his confident words.
She thought of him, then of herself.
His pity touched her and she felt less abandoned.
One day followed another, rain or shine.
She wondered when could her lot -
a flower blown by the wind ever be left behind?
She would take a risk and send a few words to the man.
Asking him to extend his compassionate hand
to save a person drowning in a sea of woes.
On a piece of stationery, she told her whole story.
How she had paid her filial debts, how she would strayed here.
The next day when the morning mists just dissipated,
she had a messenger delivered her missive.
The golden sun was disappearing in the west,
when a letter from him arrived.
She opened the cherry-blossom-decorated note
and found just two words “Tích Việt” in clear-cut strokes.
She decoded the words for their hidden meaning:
“The 21st, hour of the dog.” Is not it?”
At dusk, the birds, one by one, returned to the woods.
Through the camellias shone a half moon.
On the east wall, tree branches’ shadows stirred.
Parting the shutters, she saw So Khanh crept in.
Abashed, she gathered her nerve to greet him.
After a kowtow, she whispered her appeal:
“I am just a duckweed, a bubble. Strayed from my kindred
to bear the debt of living among the orioles and swallows.
I beg you to save me from this life.
My bones and flesh, my life and death, I entrust in your hands.
I will express my gratitude for you in hundreds of ways later on!”
He listened, nodding his head, then said:
“I am not just anybody, you know!
Since you trust me and came to me for help,
I will have your sea of woes be drained, before I am done!”
Kiều said, “I rely on your kindness for everything.
I will follow your plan, whatever it is, to end this.
He said, “I have a horse, as swift as the wind.
And a servant from a lineage of hardy people.
Let us grasp the opportunity and slip away.
Of the thirty six strategies, this one’s the best.
If any difficulties should arise,
with me here with you, they will come to naught!”
Upon hearing his words, she became suspicious.
But having gone too far, she could not draw back now.
Resigned to the risk of closing her eyes and jumping forward.
Then see to where the Maker would spin and roll her life.
Together they slipped downstairs and left.
Each on a horse, one following the other.
The autumn night advanced slowly as time passed.
The wind stripped leaves off the trees, the hills hid the moon.
Grass gleamed with dew along the well-worn trail.
Each step she took, her heart yearned for home.
As the cocks crowed in chorus, signaling dawn,
she heard loud voices of people coming from behind.
Her heart beat faster and faster in her breast.
Sở Khanh would turned rein somewhere and fled.
Alone, and not knowing what to do,
she felt frightened as she rode in the woods.
O childish Creator, how could you have the heart
to crush and trample a beautiful rose!
A pack of people surrounded her on all sides.
No claws to hide underground, no wings to fly into the sky.
Dame Tú, in hot haste, came straight at her.
In fury the old bawd dragged her back to the brothel.
Without saying a word, in furious rage,
the bawd thrashed the flower, flogged the willow tree.
Whose flesh and skin is not that of a human being.
Which rose when torn and shattered does not feel pain.
Sparing no words, Kiều confessed, pleaded for mercy.
Straightening her back from bowing, she felt shreds of flesh falling.
Raising her head from the ground, she felt blood dripping.
Kiều pleaded: “I am just a poor woman
who would left her home, her family, and came here.
Now, my life and death is in your hands.
Brought to this pass, I have accepted my situation.
But what do I care for myself, I am resigned to my fate.
But your investment, where would it be then?
An eel does not mind having mud on its head.
What little maiden shame I have, hereafter, I will forget!”
When the bawd heard what she wanted to hear,
she then required a guarantor and a written pledge.
Among the housemates was a girl, named Mã Kiều,
who pitied her and took courage to vouch for her.
The bawd kept on lecturing and questioning Kiều untill she was
satisfied with Kieu’s docile behavior before she let Kieu go.
Mã Kiều helped her to another room to rest,
and gave her some consoling advice:
“You were duped. Just accept it, nothing to be done!
Around here, who does not know who Sở Khanh is.
He is infamous in the brothels for his faithlessness.
His hand has plucked and buried many flowers.
It was their trick - the heroic sword helping the distressed damsel.
The bawd and the rogue, always a pair, planned this.
About thirty taels have passed from her hand to his.
If not, there would not be this story, nor his role acting comedy.
His part done, he will do an about-face immediately.
Say less, do not be mad and provoke him or you risk your life.”
Kiều said, “But he did make those solemn oaths.
Who would have thought that he is such a deceitful man.
She was still thinking about what would happened
when his brazen face from somewhere appeared.
Sở Khanh spoke loudly for everyone to hear:
“I heard that some new wench in this place
claimed that I seduced her and led her away.
Let her look at me and see who I really am.”
Kiều said, “Things being as they are, let us not discuss it.
You say you did not do it, so you did not. “
Sở Khanh shouted at her with curses and insults.
He came at her, his hands ready to deal blows.
She exclaimed: “O Heaven! Do you not know
who it was that seduced me, that urged me to flee?
Who led on a girl, then shoved her down the pit.
Who spoke an oath, then immediately ate back his words!
I still have his “Tích Việt” letter in my hands.
Clearly it is that face of his, and no one else.”
Her forthright words were heard by many in the house.
Some called him faithless, others laughed at his lack of conscience.
The lover’s breach of faith was plain for everyone to see.
Shamefaced, Sở Khanh sought a way to quickly retreat.
Alone in her room, Kiều sobbed and sobbed.
Thinking about her life, she felt a resigned sorrow for her lot.
“How regrettable that a thing frost-clear and silver-white”,
thought she, “must roll in the dust and wind, like any other things!
Grief or joy, it is just one life.
A beautiful maiden does not live forever in this world.
In an earlier life, I did not do well to deserve good karma.
This life, I have to repay the debts that I owed.
Anyhow, since the vase would been shattered,
I will use my body to repay life’s debts and be done.”
On a bright moonlit night,
Dame Tú dropped by and gave her some advices:
“The trade of love’s fairly involved.
We, the practitioners, need to know all its tricks.”
Kiều said: “Living this life with frequent comings of winds and rains,
when I must give my body, what else for me to do but give it!”
The bawd said, “All men are alike.
Who will waste money here if he does not get his money’s worth.
In this trade, there is still a lot of things to learn.
How to deal with men during the day or with one at night.
Daughter, you must know these things by heart:
seven seduction’s ploys, eight intimacy’s techniques.
Play love games with them until you have worn them out,
till their stony hearts must beg, till their minds are drunken with lust.
Flirt with a coquettish glance, enchant with your sensual lips,
sing in the moonlight, sport among the flowers.
These are the art and practices of this house’s trade.
Mastery of these skills required to be an exemplary mistress.”
Kiều quietly listened to her teachings from start to finish.
She knitted her eyebrows and her face went pale.
Just to hear what was said already embarrassed her.
She thought, “Life is so full of many queer and unpleasant things.
Poor me! A girl who would led a sheltered life
now have to learn these very curious trades.
I must be shameless hereafter and wear a brazen face.
Since my life had sunken down to this level , so be it!
Alas for my life, I had gone astray.
My life’s in the hands of others. What can I do?”
The brothel then let down Kiều’s new pink curtains.
The higher the jade’s price, the greater the person’s intrinsic worth.
So many flirting butterflies and bees swarmed around her.
Month-long drink sprees, whole nights of mirth and laughter.
Like a leaf trembling under the winds,
like a branch perched by many birds,
at dawn, she showed one handsome official out,
at dusk, she went to meet a poet-scholar.
Late at night, when the drunkenness had passed,
startled at her state, she felt sorrow for herself.
“I was raised in silk and brocade,
but now I am like a shredded flower, laying in the middle of the road.
This face - how is it so shameless, so brazen.
This body – the butterflies and bees have been all over.
Let them take their pleasures of my flesh.
As for me, I do not know what it is that they call Love!”
Sometimes she would enjoy a fresh breeze by the flowers.
Sometimes she would gaze through the curtains at the moonlit snow.
All the sceneries, none of them does not bear sorrow.
When a person’s sad, the scenery can never be joyful!
Sometimes she would paint, or write some verse,
play the lute under moonlight, or chess beneath flowers.
But her cheerfulness is just a forced cheerfulness.
With whom to share her joys when there is no friend of the heart?
Bamboo leaves rustling in the wind,
raindrops falling on plum blossoms,
she did not care to enjoy, as her mind had hundreds of concerns.
Her heart, when she thought about the present and distant past,
became a tangled mess, a well of pain.
She missed her parents so much.
Each day theyare getting older.
Far away, beyond the mountains and the rivers,
they would never have thought her life could have turned out like this!
Her brother and sister are still a little too young and innocent.
Who would replace her then to take care of the parents?
She remembered her troth with her beloved.
From so far away, would he understand her heart’s feelings?
When he returns and asks for her, only to find that she,
like the willow branch on Chương Đài street,
was broken off the tree and passed from one hand to another.
She hoped she could somehow repay his love and wondered:
“Was the other flower (her sister) attached onto this branch yet?”
Her emotions tangled like a skein of raveled silk threads.
Dreams of her hometown filled many a long night.
Behind the gauze curtains of her window, she felt so forlorn,
without family and friends in this small corner of the world.
Just a sunset today, soon another sunset tomorrow.
Day passed by day, as the silver hare and the golden crow chased each other.
She thought of those in the Heartbreaking Destiny League:
“God had made them to be beautiful women,
But he must injure them, destroy their lives to balance the scale!
Each girl, once doomed to a life of dust-and-wind,
will have to drink her full cup of shame till it is empty.”
Of the brothel’s patrons, there was a man:
Kỳ Tâm with surname Thúc, who came from a lineage of scholars.
Originally from Hsi district in Ch’ang county,
he went with his father to open a shop in Lin-tzu.
Kiều’s fame as a young queen among flowers attracted him.
He arranged to have his card sent to her chamber.
Behind the drapes, he saw the peach blossom flower.
Her looks and charms, he found them all lovely and enchanting.
The red camellia exuded desirability with its youthful bloom.
The windier, the rainier the spring day, the more desirable it was.
The delicate flower shimmered under the soft moonlight, looking so vulnerable.
Who could hold back his heart on such a spring night?
Nothing strange that when two kindred spirits meet,
they would be bounded together by a tie that none can separate.
At first, it started out as an affair of seduction and lust.
After being together for some time, it turned into love and trust.
The god of fortune has smiled on his destiny.
As luck would have it, his father went on a homebound journey.
Now, he became one part alert and nine part bewitched.
On these spring days, he would often to her place visit.
Sometimes on the breezy balconies,
sometimes in the moonlit yards,
they would pour wine for each other, speak in linked verses.
With incense burned in the morning, tea in the afternoon,
they would play games of chess, and perform guzheng and lute duets.
Both were deeply immersed in the round of pleasures.
The more they know of each other’s disposition, the greater their attachments.
Is it not strange that a beautiful woman’s waves of attraction,
can topple houses and pavilions as if they were just playthings.
Young Thúc, used to spending money lavishly,
would throw out thousands for her laughter in a fit of gaiety.
The bawd then would make Kieu even more desirable,
adorning her with beautiful dresses, cosmetics, and all.
Excited with smell of money, her greedy blood wants much more.
Beneath the moon, the cuckoos cried for summer.
On the wall, flames danced with pomegranates’ red flowers.
In her chamber, on a day with some leisure,
she dropped the pink curtains to take a bath perfumed with flowers.
Behold! Such clear jade, such white ivory!
Nature’s masterpiece in all its glory.
Thúc gazed and gazed, then praised her beauty
with an eight-lines-seven-words poem that he just wrote,
the elaborate form of which came from the Tang dynasty.
She said, “I am happy to know your feelings.
Each word is jade, each line is brocade.
Good or bad, I should write a poem in reply.
But homesickness’s occupying my mind.
My heart’s still with the homeward-drifting golden clouds.
My rhyming reply verse, I will owe you for another time.
He said, “You are talking very strangely!
are not you the daughter of this place’s owner?
On hearing this, more gloom’s reflected in her autumn eyes.
She thought of the past heart-rending events, and felt very sad.
She said, “I am like a flower, fallen from its branch.
You are like a butterfly flirting about just to have fun.
My lord, you already have a wedded wife.
The day’s short, let’s not talk any more on this subject.”
Thúc Sinh said, “Since we have known each other,
my heart has nurtured a love for you, a love that endures
with the mountains and rivers.
Wanting to live with you as husband and wife,
I need to know all about your situation and your past life.
She replied, “I am humbly and deeply grateful for your intention,
but I am afraid it wo not be easy with your wife.
I have lived in this neighborhood of pleasure for quite a while.
I have known men to love flowers just for their make-up colors .
But when the hue and the fragrance fade,
will one’s heart still keeps its love?”
Besides, within the moon palace,
there is already the Moon Lady who rules the place.
Till now, with sacred bonds of matrimony, you two are very close.
But another woman in the house will divide your love.
What am I – a drifting duckweed, a wandering cloud
to lessen the love and affection that you have for your spouse?
Should things go wrong, they will all fall on my head.
On whom will the punishment be given, but me?
But if you keep a firm controlling hand,
then you can protect me now and then.
But if the wife is the one who set the laws,
I will be at the mercy of the lioness’s jaws.
Under your roof, I will always have to bow my head.
Sour vinegar (jealousy) will be three times worse than blazing fire.
Besides your wife, there is also your father.
Will his heart hold some compassion for this poor girl?
Would he think that, ‘What does it matter –
the fate of a flower blooming by the wall.
From the whorehouse, let it go back to the whorehouse.’
Then I would feel even more dirty and ashamed.
I am resigned to my lot, just afraid for your reputation.
Love me in a way that makes our lives go smooth.
Plan everything well with no loose ends, and I will gladly obey.”
He said, “You speak with so much caution!
My heart and yours, are they still strangers to each other?
Do not worry about far-off things that may not happen.
Depend on me to work everything out.
I am right by your side. What does it matter, the remote difficulties?
I am determined to marry you, and will brave all the storms that come our way.”
The two confided in each other all the secrets in their hearts.
They swore love oaths by the mountains and the sea.
The night, however, was too short for their love talks.
Outside, the moon had sunk behind the west hills.
Using an excuse of taking her out for some fresh air
around the bamboo pavilion, he hid her at a place.
War or peace? He prepared for both routes.
He got advices from a strategist, and used information from spies.
Then he sent word to Dame Tú.
Outmaneuvered, she had no choice but to settle a deal.
He paid the ransom money into the bawd’s hands.
And notified the law of Kieu’s return to an honest life.
Now that both the legal system and men had been dealt with,
Kiều was immediately freed from her infamous prison.
Like bamboo and plum flower, they lived together under one roof.
Their love grew wider and deeper than the rivers and the seas.
Like fire and incense, their passions burned hotly in the night.
Her jade-and-lotus beauty glowed brighter and brighter with happiness and delight.
For half a year, they lived together as lovers.
In the courtyard, plane trees mixed green with yellow leaves.
Along the autumn hedge, the mums had just shown their buds.
Then Thúc Sinh saw his father came riding back.
His father flew into a stormy and thunderous rage.
Heart heavy with concern for his son, he thought to split up the pair.
Determined, he spoke his order right away:
Back to her old whorehouse, this painted-cheeked girl must return.
Before the explicit, unconditional paternal order,
the young man took courage and appealed to his father’s feelings.
He said, “I know I am guilty of many crimes.
However you want to punish me, I will not mind.
But my fingers already dipped into indigo.
I was foolish but there is no way to be wise again.
Even if I lived with her for just one day,
who would hold a lute and have the heart to rip the strings off?
If you will not have compassion for my heart’s desire,
well then, I would rather die than to betray her trust.”
The stubborn words aroused the old man’s anger.
He knelt in a district court and presented his complaint.
On a level plain suddenly arose surging waves
The prefect summoned the lovers to come in for questioning.
Together, they followed the sheriff
into a court, and knelt down together side by side.
Looking up, they saw the stern face of the prefect.
To establish his authority, he began with harsh words:
“That young man there is a foolish reveler;
and this girl here is nothing but a shifty cheat.
What is it but a discarded flower, a used perfume,
who borrows the shine of rouge and powder to dazzle the naive.
To judge from the state of the complaint,
nothing have been settled between the two of you.
According to the law that’s applied to this matter:
There are two choices, which one to choose is up to you.
One choice is to undergo physical punishment decreed by the Law.
The other is to send her back to the brothel.”
Kiều said, “My mind’s already made up!
I shall not be caught in the spider’s web again.
Soiled or clean, it is still a choice for my body and my life.
Weak and helpless, I will endure the Law’s severe punishment .”
The prefect ordered, “Apply the punishment.”
So pitiful she looked, a peony in shackles, cuffs, and cangue.
Resigned to her fate, she dared not cry against injustice.
Her rosy cheeks smeared with tears, her eyebrows knitted in pain.
She lay writhing on the floor, filled with dust and mud.
Her face lost its glow, her frame looked thinner than a plum branch.
Young Thúc’s situation was pitiful.
From afar he watched her being tortured, his heart felt torn.
He cried, “All her sufferings, because of me!
If I had listened to her, this would not have happened.
With my shallow mind, I did not think deeply enough,
and had caused her all this grief and shame.”
When the prefect heard those words, his heart was moved,
He then asked young Thúc to tell him his story.
Thúc Sinh immediately responded, stifling sobs,
and recounted all that she would said when he proposed:
“She would thought of all the possibilities.
From the start, she knew that something like today would happen.
It was me who tried to take care of everything
which caused her to come to this lamentable plight.”
On hearing the story, the prefect took pity on them.
His severity put aside, he thought of how to get them out of this situation.
He said, “If what you told me is the truth, then this harlot
still knows her place and what is right and wrong.”
Thúc Sinh replied, “Although just a woman of lowly stature,
she would taken some classes and knows a little of poetry and literature.”
The prefect laughed: “Well, that’s very good then!
Let she improvise a piece on the the theme of the cangue.”
She complied – she raised the brush and quickly wrote.
Then put the flowery sheet of paper on his desk.
The prefect praised: “It surpasses the heights of the Tang dynasty!
This talent and that beauty, thousand liangs of gold can not buy!
Truly a beauty and elite gentleman pair.
Of the Chou and Chen, one ca not find a couple better matched.
Let’s stop harboring resentment and anger.
Why break up a beautiful concert of guzheng and lute?
You had brought this case to the court.
Outwardly, the rules of the law should be strictly followed.
But inwardly, compassion and mercy should be bestowed.
Your son’s mate, your daughter-in-law, is part of your family.
Just discard your displeasure then everything will be settled.
The prefect then decreed a public wedding.
The bridal carriage took off like the wind,
the torches lighting up the night like stars.
A music band playing flutes and drums
led the newlyweds to their nuptial chamber.
Old Thúc really liked her virtues and respected her talents.
Thereafter, he gave no more harsh words or stormy scenes.
In their home, tuberoses and orchids mixed their scents.
Having known bitterness, they loved each other more than ever.
Time flew by as they indulged in wine and chess.
The spring peach blossoms were fading their reds,
and the summer lotuses budding their greens.
On a quiet night, behind the curtains,
she had some misgivings and told him about them:
“Since I would followed you to live this new life,
almost a year have passed, as swallows replaced geese in the sky.
News from your home arrived less and less everyday.
With a new concubine, you have been lukewarm to your wife.
Come to think of it, I find it rather very odd.
From talk and gossip, who could hold back news of our relationship?
I heard from hearsay that your wife
observes strict rules of conduct and speaks with authority.
I am afraid of these uncommon souls.
It is hard to measure the bottom of a river.
And to think that we have been living for a year together.
Whatever we do, our relationship can not be hidden for long.
Till now, you have had no news from her.
I am afraid something may be afoot from within.
Please go back home to her now.
First, this will please your wife, then we can learn what is in her mind.
Do not conceal our relationship from her,
because, as days pass by, this will be very improper.
Hearing her counsel, spoken with calm,
Thúc Sinh reluctantly made up his mind to go home.
The next morning he informed his father, who also urged him
to make the trip as soon as possible.
To drink their cups of farewell,
they went from their spring pavilion to the place of parting.
The Chin river stretch far off in a soft blue strip.
Along the bank, some willow branches hung melancholy.
They held hands and sighed.
Holding farewell cups to their lips, the words stuck in their throats.
She said, “Although mountains and rivers separate us,
you need to make the home warm and peaceful,
before things can run smooth outside.
It’s difficult to conceal things from observant eyes.
So, do not cover your eyes and try to catch a bird.
We two are tied by a rather fragile bond.
When you arrived home, prepare to explain things clearly to her.
Even when she becomes upset and raises a storm,
do tell her that I know my place and recognize her authority.
This way is much better than to try to conceal our relationship.
Which would only cause very big troubles later on.
If you love me, please remember what I have just said.
A year’s long but it will eventually pass.
The parting cup’s for us to remember today.
The cup of joy, we will wait for this day of next year!”
He mounted the horse; she let go of his dress.
In the maple woods, autumn has spread her color of parting sorrow.
Swirls of dust arose as he rode off. She kept on watching
till he vanished behind thousands of mulberry groves.
The returnee, alone with her shadow throughout the silent night.
The departee, thousand of miles away, alone in some distant place.
Who would split the lover’s moon into two halves?
Half sunk on her lone pillow, the other half - on the long road…
Why tell what our young man went through on the road?
Let us talk about the mistress of his house instead:
She came from the famous Hoạn clan.
Her name was Hoạn Thư, and a minister’s daughter.
By the happy winds of destiny, she and Thúc met each other.
They have been married for quite some time.
Of her personal conduct, it is above reproach.
But when she wants to find some fault
or get one to do something, she is quite an old hand.
Since she heard that his garden had a new flower,
lot of gossip came from others but not a single word from him.
The fire of anger in her heart kept burning hotter and hotter.
Against that knave, whose inconstant heart has wandered.
If he would confessed to me the truth,
I would have allowed her to be in my good grace.
It would be foolish for me to lash out in anger
and gain the stigma of a jealous woman.
But no! He covered it up and kept concealing it.
Such childish behaviour that’s so ridiculous!
He thought since he is not with me, he can hide it from me.
Well, if he wants to play the hiding game, then I will hide it for him!
That girl is nothing for me to worry about.
The ant’s inside the cup, where can it crawl!
I will make them not able to look each other in the eye.
I will crush her spirit so that she dares not raise her head!
I will make them see all this with their own eyes.
I will make the betrayer sees the consequences of invoking my wrath.
Her thoughts of revenge, she kept only to herself.
and seemingly turned a deaf ear to everything that others tell.
Next week, there were two persons,
who reported news about her husband to gain her favor.
Hoạn Thư raged furiously:
“I loathed those who weave and embroider things to annoy me!
My husband is not like those people.
These things must be from the slanderers!”
Then she immediately, in a show of authority, gave orders.
Some were slapped, some had their teeth pulled out.
There was complete silence inside the house.
No one dared to say another word!
In the pink chamber, she would passed the nights and days in quiet ease.
She talked and laughed merrily as if nothing had happened.
But anger simmered in her heart day and night.
In the meantime, her husband has just arrived.
They spoke their joys of seeing each other after a long absence.
Their love became cozier, their ardor more passionate.
To celebrate his return, they drank many a cup together.
But who could know the feelings in their hearts.
He would come home to find out his wife’s intent.
And was prepared to reveal the facts to her.
On several occasions, drunk or sober, she would talk and laugh
and not make a slightest allusion about his affair.
He thought that he had kept things hidden well so far.
If no one interrogate, why should he confess?
But he continued to hesitate and remained undecided.
Afraid the revelation would cause a storm.
Sometimes when they were sharing some jokes,
she would make some vague, insinuating remark:
“In a world where pearls and stones, gold and bronze, lie mixed,”
said she, “we have gained an absolute trust in each other.
Praise be to those long tongues that spin the long yarns
to tell the tales of your love adventures.
If I had been persuaded and acted without thinking,
I would have become a laughingstock of the world.”
As she said all this in casual, teasing tones,
he followed along to parry the thrusts and blows.
They would often laugh and tease each other. 
Sometimes under the night lamp with their shadows blended together.
Sometimes under the moonlit night where they stand shoulder to shoulder.
He began to take a liking to this gentle country life.
In the wells, the golden leaves of plane trees had already fallen.
It reminded him of the world that he left behind
where, for almost a year, he would loved and lived.
He did not dare to tell her of his private feelings.
But the lady already guessed and insinuated to him:
“A year has gone by since you left your father.
Return to Lin-tzu to take care of him.”
Her words untied a knot within his chest, and relieved his heart.
He soon rode off on his horse across strange hills and streams.
He saw the blue sky reflected in the gleaming water,
and blue smoke rose on the distant ramparts,
and mountain peaks covered with the sun’s yellow.
As soon as he took off on the long road,
she boarded her carriage and went to see her family.
She told everything to her mother.
His infidelity, and how she would borne her wrong.
She said, “I think that a jealous tantrum is like an skin itch,
which only makes him look bad, and no one will praise me for that!
So I would kept quiet and looked the other way,
but I already had a plan that I would prepared for quite some time.
Lin-tzu would take about a month by land.
But by sea, we can get there directly and in much less time.
We will outfit a boat and choose some trusted servants.
They will go there and drag her back with feet in chains.
When she is here, I will exhaust her strength, and drive her nuts.
I will torture her, make her suffer and miserable for him and all to see.
So, firstly, I can quench my hatred against both of them.
And secondly, I will make this a comic spectacle for posterity.”
Her mother praised, “An excellent plan.”
She indulged her daughter and left her free to do as she will.
After the boat was set up with sails,
several thugs were recruited.
Then several instructions for various scenarios were given,
before the boat set sail towards Lin-tzu.
Since her lover’s departure, Kieu sat by her window, all alone.
Her heart was filled with sadness as she thinks of him and her future.
The evening shadows hanging overhead reminded her of her parents.
“Have they warm clothes? Do they eat well? How’s their health?
My clipped hair has now reached my shoulder,
but what has become of all my vows of love?
I am just a humble clinging ivy.
Will Heaven give me his blessings for this matrimony?
Why have so many unjust misfortunes fallen on my head?.
I would rather give up everything and live alone like the Moon Lady in her  coldpalace.”
Autumn night, a breeze entered through the pink curtains.
A crescent moon, the Three Stars high in the sky.
She lit incense sticks before Buddha’s altar
and was pouring out her heart in a long prayer.
When from behind the flower shrubs, a pack of evil men sprang out.
They were like the devils that came from underground.
The courtyard was soon all gleaming with their shining swords.
Terrified, she still did not understand what was going on,
when she was administered a drowse-inducing drug,
that put her mind into a dreamlike sleep state.
They then placed her on a horse,
and set fire to the library and her bedchamber.
On the river bank laid some stranger’s corpse.
They dragged it in to deceive people to think it was her.
The frightened servants had lost their heads.
They ran wildly away. Some hid themselves among the tall grass,
others sought cover behind the big trees.
Thuc’s father whose lodging was nearby,
suddenly saw flames rising and was terrified.
He and his servants ran straight to the spot
to take out the roaring fire and search for Kieu.
The wind rose higher, and the flames rose even higher.
The servants searched every corner but did not find her anywhere!
They looked at each other, eyes haggard, and hearts afraid.
in deep wells, among thick trees, they looked for her,
and every other possible nook and corner.
They ran back to the place where her chamber was.
And saw a heap of cinders and charred bones.
Not holding evil thoughts, who would ever suspect foul play.
They were sure it was her, otherwise, who else could it be!
Old Thúc broke into sobs.
He pitied his poor absent son, and sorrowed for the virtuous girl.
Her remains were gathered and brought home.
Then shrouded and the burial was followed by Buddhist ceremonies.
All the common funeral rituals for Kiều had been performed,
when his son finally came back.
Where they had composed verses, he entered to find
a heap of ashes and cinders, with four sun-and-rain beaten walls.
He went to his father’s house, and saw in the middle room,
a memorial tablet with her name placed on an altar.
Alas, after he heard the full tale of what happened,
love tore his heart, and anguish burned his soul.
He rolled on the ground, he wept and lamented:
“A woman of her merit – how could such an unjust fate befall her?
We were so sure that plum blossom and bamboo would again be together.
Who would have thought that our farewell would be the last time ever!
Love stirs remembrance, remembrance arouses more pain.
Who could bury his distress and quench his sorrow.
Young Thúc heard that in the region there is a shaman,
who can summon spirits, and a powerful master of his art.
On the three Fairy Islands or down in Hades,
he could trace the whereabouts of all spirits.
Thúc procured gifts and sent them to the shaman, requesting his service.
He asked the shaman to search for Kiều until he saw her in person.
The shaman prostrated before the altar erected for the occasion.
His spirit left the body for a few moments,
but before the incense stick had burned out,
his spirit returned, and he then told Thúc his revelations:
“I did not see her face, but of her fate I had learned.
This person carries many karma’s heavy burdens.
She still owes many debts, thus she can not leave this world yet.
Her star indicates that she is currently having big trouble.
Wait one more year from now before you can get news of her.
But then, when both of you are face to face,
you want to greet each other but dare not to! it is so strange!”
Such very strange words, the likes of which had never been heard.
Given what would happened, how could he believe the shaman’s words.
It is just bad hocus-pocus from people of this trade.
Where would she be now if she is still in this world of dust?
He mourned his flower, and felt a resigned sorrow for the past springs of joys:
“How often that a person like me have the opportunity
to meet the fairy, Kiều, again, if ever, on this earth?”
“The fallen flower had drifted downstream.”, he thought,
not knowing that hell was waiting for her in the human realm.
Hound and Hawk had succeeded in their wicked plot.
They carried the young woman down onto the boat.
And then with all the sails unfurled and the ropes taut,
the boat headed in the direction of the town of Tích.
After the boat landed, Hound and Hawk went straight to the palace,
where they turned Kiều in, to receive their due rewards.
They carried Kiều to the servants’ quarters
while she was still in her slumber.
She woke up with a jolt from her dream, and was startled:
“My house vanished and whose palace is this?”
She was still half awake and half asleep,
when she heard a loud voice ordering her to appear.
Housemaids rushed in to urge her to respond to the call.
With dread, she followed one of them.
On the way, she looked up and saw an awe-inspiring hall
with the inscription: “Heaven’s Prime Minister.”
Although in daytime, candles were lit on both sides.
In its center was a jewel-decorated bed and a haughty lady on it sat.
Kiều was questioned in depth from root to branch.
She dutifully answered the haughty lady in all sincerity.
For some unknown reason, the lady got very angry.
And scolded Kiều with insults: “these vagabonds are shameless.
You wench are definitely not a good girl.
If you are not a servant who deserted your service, then
you must be the unfaithful wife who cheated your husband.
A graveyard cat, a strutting hen in the fields.
You tried to explain this and that, but can not clear your name.
You have been sold to me. You are nothing but my slave.
And yet, proud manners and such airs you dare to display.”
Teach her the house’s laws, my lasses!
Give her thirty strokes to let her know her place!”
“Yes, Madam”, all the servants replied in unison.
Even if she would a hundred mouths, she could not, with them, reason.
The bamboo sticks hit her with energetic effort.
Whose flesh would not be torn? Whose heart would not be terrified?
Pity for the poor peach blossom twig!
The storm had shattered it once again.
Flower Slave was to be her new name, as the lady ordered.
She was taught and forced into a housemaid role.
She joined the ranks of servants dressed in green garb.
Day passed by day, her hair unkempt, and skin dull as lead.
Among the servants, there was a housekeeper.
Who saw Kieu’s sweetness and pitied her plight.
She would have tea with Kiều, or give her medicine.
And gave Kiều’s advice to help her survive.
She taught: “Good or ill fortune, we can do nothing but accept.
But a frail willow needs to protect itself.
Your current situation probably results from karmic debt to some people.
It’s not with no reason that you are here now and have fallen to this level.
Beware of everything – the walls here do have ears.
When you see an old friend, do not look at him.
Just in case, when some sudden storm happen,
how can an ant or a bee proclaim its innocence?”
Her pearly tears kept rolling down her cheeks.
A vague foreboding filled her heart, and she felt a bitter sorrow:
“Living the flower-in-storm fate, I had already borne a lot of griefs.
But this new misfortune casted upon me is twice the hardships.
Alas, is not my fate not burdensome enough,
that Heaven has to relentless bind a girl to Fate’s cruelty.
Kieu accepted that it was predestined debt,
and resigned herself to live out her fate and not seek death.
While Kieu was living there as a servant,
one day, Miss Hoạn came home to see her parents.
Mother and daughter talked about this and that.
Then the old lady sent for her and gave an order:
“Miss Hoạn does not have enough people in her domestic staff.
You will go over there and be her chambermaid.”
Kiều obeyed and followed her new mistress home,
not knowing if she was going to hell or heaven.
From early morning till late at night, she would be ready
at beck and call to serve her mistress towels, combs, and whatever.
Kieu knew her slave status and never took a step outward.
One calm evening, the mistress asked Kieu to play her lute.
Kiều obeyed and plucked the strings.
Sometimes like the murmurs of breeze,
sometimes like the sounds of jade falling into a bowl,
the melody was so beautiful, it enchanted the soul.
Miss Hoạn, on hearing her music, seemed taken with her talent.
Her usually stern manners were, quite a bit, softened.
Within a stranger’s house, Kiều lived a slave’s life.
For a confidante, she had her own shadow in the morning,
and her heart at night.
She thought of her spouse at Lin-tzu with resigned sorrow:
To meet him again would be in some future life.
Looking up, all four directions of the sky
were covered with clouds of white
and she wondered where her home lies.
Months and days passed slowly by.
Young Thúc with close-at-hand worries,
did not know of her servitude in his home.
Since his lovebird had flown away,
poor Thúc have been living alone at Lin-tzu.
He looked at the crescent moon and saw her eyebrows.
His heart ached with sorrow when he smelled her old perfume.
The lotuses wilted, and the mums bloomed. 
Long hours of melancholy while the day grew shorter.
Then winter passed and spring arrived.
Where could he find her in this world of red dust?
To ease his grief, he told himself all that happened was fated.
Nostalgia wakened thoughts of his hometown.
Longing for home, he went back to see his family.
Miss Hoạn, waiting at the gate, greeted him with effusion.
They inquired each other’s health and talked of many things.
She then had the drapes rolled up, and called Kiều
to come out to greet and kowtow to the master on his return.
Kiều hesitantly walked out, step by step.
From afar, she looked at the man, and thought:
“Is it because of the lights or the sun shining in my eyes
that made me see, sitting there, clearly is my Thúc?
Now I knew what plot was in the mistress’s mind.
Oh, no! I had been trapped in her wicked plot.
What kind of a strange plot in the world is this?
How is it that this world has such a devilish person?
Plainly, Thúc and I are a married couple.
But now, I am made a servant, and he is the master.
Outwardly, she talked and laughed so cheerfully,
but inside, she is insidious, and kill without using a dagger.
Now that Thúc’s position and mine are like heaven and earth,
What should I say and what should I do now?
The more she looked at him, the more confused she became.
Her heart’s all tangled up like a raveled skein of silk.
For fear of the mistress’s authority, she dared not disobey.
She made a deep bow and knelt down on the floor.
Thúc was astounded and dismayed:
Alas! Is not that my beautiful Kiều?
How is it that she came to this pass?
O! we had fallen into my wife’s trap.
He did not dare to say that he knew Kiều.
But can not prevent tears spilling from his eyes.
Miss Hoạn saw and questioned:
“You just arrived home. What happened to make you look thus?
Thúc replied, “I just took off mourning.
But I thought of Mother, and my heart’s filled with grief.”
She praised, “What a filial son!
Let us celebrate your return, and may the wine dissipate
the melancholy of autumn nights.”
The husband and wife toasted several cups of wine to each other.
Kiều was ordered to stand there to serve them the drinks.
The lady would try to find fault just to scold her.
She was made to kneel and offer up each drink.
Thúc acted more and more like a dazed men.
Tears streamed down his face, as he drank and drank.
Averting his eyes, he would suddenly laugh or speak.
Using the pretext that he has drunk, he tried to leave.
The lady hurriedly shouted: “Flower Slave,
persuade him to drink, if he does not, I will lash you.
On hearing this, Thúc’s heart became even more shattered.
He finished the offered drink, and swallowed its bitterness.
The lady laughed and talked in a joyous, half-drunk mood.
The wine feast not yet finished, she called for entertainment.
She said: “Flower Slave has many talents.
Let her play some music piece for you to hear.”
Kiều was devastated, her mind in a daze.
She obeyed nonetheless and sat before the thin gauze screen to tune her lute.
The four strings together seemed to cry and moan,
wrenching the heart of the person who’s feasting on the table.
It is still the same melody, 
but the lady smiled, and the man cried inside.
Not able to hold back the tears,
he bent his head down, and wiped them off.
The lady then shouted at her:
“Why do you play such a heart-rending piece for our joyful feast?
Why do not you think before you act?
If the lord is distressed, it is your sin.”
On hearing this, Thúc felt even more distressed.
He hurriedly smiled and said a few words to have the matter dropped.
When the dragon-shaped waterclock marked the third watch,
the lady appeared to be appeased.
In her heart, she was elated:
“This joy has made up for all my past silent sufferings.”
He, however, felt ashamed and sorrowed.
The more he thought, the more bitter was his heart.
The man and the lady went into their bedroom.
Meanwhile, Kiều stood alone, by the lamp, in the long night:
“Now, I understood the reason for Thúc’s wife’s long silence.
Such a strange jealousy, so hard to believe!
Her plot was to separate the two lovebirds, me and Thúc. And make us go separate ways. 
And can not look each other in the eyes.
Now, we are separated like the abyss and the sky.
No more exchange of thoughts and feelings possible between us.
My fate fragile like a candlewick, my heart heavy like lead,
When I can get out of here, will I still have my youth?
A helpless woman in the winds of fate,
will I be able to escape whole from this storm?
Alone in the night, she kept brooding on the present and the past.
Tears streamed down her cheeks throughout the night’s five watches.
Day and night, Kieu served her mistress.
Then one day, the lady asked her about her life.
She chose her words carefully then answered:
“I sometimes felt deep sorrow for my lot.”
The lady then asked her husband:
“My darling, please question the slave to get all the facts.”
His entrails felt like they were scraped.
But it is not proper to explain the reason, but to question Kiều would pain his heart.
However, being afraid of causing trouble for her,
he, in a soft tone, proceeded to ask Kiều some questions.
Kneeling in the courtyard, with her head bowed,
Kiều handed up a sheet of paper that told, in brief, her life’s story.
And presented it to the lady.
Upon reading it, she seemed somewhat touched.
She handed the paper sheet to Thúc Sinh,
and said, “We should respect her talents, and pity her situation!
If Fortune favors her with wealth and rank,
a palace cast in gold would not be beyond her price!
A beauty drifting in life’s sea of woes.
She is talented, it is regrettable that she has such a fate!”
Thúc Sinh said, “It’s really true as you have said:
“A great beauty often bears a life of misfortunes!
In the olden times, many renowned beauties suffered perhaps just that much.
Show your mercy, please make her life easier.”
The lady said, “From what she wrote,
she wants to take her poor-fated self into a Buddhist temple.
Alright, I will satisfy her desire,
to help her break the cycle of woes in her life.
There is a small Kuan-yin temple in our garden.
It has a tall tree that is over a hundred feet high,
and flowers that bloom throughout the four seasons.
Temple has many plants and flowers,
a small pond and miniature mountain.
We will let her go there to watch over the shrine and copy the sutras.
The next day, when dawn had just came,
with five offerings, flowers, and incense,
she was brought to the temple.
She pledged to live by the three vows and the five commandments.
Then, her green dress was replaced with a nun’s robe.
And her religious name was changed to Pure Spring.
Morning and night, she will light up the oil lamps.
The girls, Spring and Autumn, were assigned to be her assistants.
Since she took refuge in the temple,
she was closer to the Purple Bamboo Grove, 
and far way from the red-dust world.
She no longer expects to have any love relationships.
It’s enough for her that she has spared the shame of selling her charms.
Before Buddha’s statue, her sorrows were drowned and forgotten.
Each day, she would copy sutra texts, and burns incense at night.
O The divine sweet dewdrops from Kuan-yin’s willow branch
will help extinguish human passions and lust.
Since she put on a nun’s brown robe,
the autumn moon would passed the zenith a few times.
Behind bolted doors and a closed-mesh net,
she would talk to others, but wept when alone.
Her temple and Thúc’s study were fairly close.
And yet the distance between them was ten times longer
than the distance from their places to the faraway mountains.
For a long time, Thúc Sinh concealed his sighs and complaints.
One day when Miss Hoạn visited her kinsfolk,
he used the opportunity to sneak out
and went straight to the garden temple to see Kiều.
Thúc sobbed and sobbed his heart out.
His tears felt in streams and wetted his green dress.
He said, “I am ashamed for betraying your trust,
and let you alone suffer the consequences of our love.
Outwitted by a woman, my heart pained at seeing you
so badly treated, but I was at a loss on how to tell the truth.
Because of me, you have come to this grief.
Precious jade covered in mud, a life wasted in its youth!
Dangers and difficulties, I do not mind facing,
since I wanted to be with you, in death and in life.
But I still owe my parents and ancestors an heir.
With clenched teeth, I had to break our bond into two.
I am ashamed of breaking my vow of love.
Could my next hundred future lives redeem my unkept pledge?
She replied, “I am like a raft in stormy waters,
floating and sinking depends on the winds of Fortune!
Struggling a life in the muddy sand,
how would it make sense for me to think of love?
Like a drop of rain falling to some random place on the ground,
my life’s just a pitiable sight for spectators to watch and chat about!
But the lute and the strings did come together,
If not for a lifetime, our love had lasted for more than a day.
Please find a way for me to leave this place.
That would prove your great love, and you will earn my deepest gratitude.
Thúc replied, “For a long time, I have thought
that the insidious human heart (his wife) is unfathomable.
If and when a raging storm breaks out,
you would be harmed, and I would be grieved.
Seek your freedom. Run away from here, as far as you can.
Our love is only thus lasting!
Soon, we shall be going very different paths.
When could we ever resume our mountain-and-river oaths again?
Even if the river runs dry, stone worn out
A dying silkworm still clings to its silk thread!”
They talked about the past and the future.
They talked and talked but still not enough time
to express their feelings for each other.
While eyes locking with eyes and hands holding hands,
they heard the alarm signal from the altar maid
that someone was approaching.
He gulped down his sorrow and shame, then walked away.
Miss Hoạn, coming from some place,
had already made her way through the flowers.
She smiled sweetly and spoke with honeyed tone:
“Darling, Have you been out here taking a walk?”
He thought for an excuse, then answered:
“While gathering flowers, my feet wandered here,
so I stayed and watched the nun copied the sutras.”
She praised Kiều: “Her calligraphy’s beautiful.
It is comparable with Lanting Xu print.
It is a shame that she is a drifting flower, a homeless wanderer.
A thousand liangs of gold is worth it to buy her talents.
After they finished drinking red plum tea,
husband and wife returned to Thúc’s study.
Feeling ashamed and abandoned,
Kiều whispered to the maid, Flower, asking her what had happened.
Flower said, “Mistress had been here for quite a while.
She tiptoed to watch and listened for about half an hour.
She is very clear about your love with master.
She heard everything you said to each other:
Your ordeals, your sorrows, your love.
The master’s grief, your sighs and laments .
She told me to stand to one side.
After tired of hearing, she walked upstairs.”
Upon hearing the tale, Kiều was very shocked:
“A woman like that, we should not find another!
That was total self control. That was skilled pretension.”
Kiều got goosebumps just thinking about it:
“From where is this woman with such cleverness and deviousness,
to make my Thúc become a person with hands tied!”
“She would caught me and Thúc together.
Any other jealous woman would have frowned and clenched her teeth.
And yet, she kept silent and not said a word.
She greeted him cheerfully and said gentle, loving words.
When a person’s angry and shows his anger, that’s just normal.
But when mad, and yet all smiling,
that is a person with a deep and insidious heart!”
“I have to protect myself.
Tiger’s mouth, snake’s venom are all in this place!
If I do not run away, sooner or later,
she will cut down the flower that she had hedged!
A floating water fern does not mind strong currents.
A drifting life anywhere is still a drifting life.
I am just afraid that when on foreign soil by myself,
with empty hands, it would be difficult to find food and shelter.”
Her thoughts moved in circles without resolution.
Then she saw laid several altar objects made of gold and silver.
She took a few items and hid them inside her dress.
Drumbeats would just sounded, marking the night’s third watch.
She pulled herself over the flowered wall, and groped her way,
in the direction of the waning moon, to the west.
She walked through wooded hills and sandy trails immersed in mists.
While the roosters crowed from moonlit huts,
small fresh shoeprints were seen on the dew-soaked bridge.
Pity the young girl on the long road at night, alone,
enduring the wind and fatigue, she kept walking on and on.
When dawn broke over the mulberry fields,
there stood a forlorn figure on the road with no place to call home!
She saw a pagoda in the far distance.
On it was the sign “Pagoda of Retreat”.
She hurried there and knocked on the door.
The prioress heard her and led her inside.
Seeing the young girl dressed in a nun’s brown garb,
the kind prioress, Giác Duyên, felt compassion for her.
She asked Kiều questions about her origin.
Kiều made up a story:
This humble nun’s from Peking.
who had been living by Budda’s teachings for some time.
My teacher will be coming here later.
She told me to bring you these gifts.”
She then took out the golden bell and the silver gong
from her dress and showed them to the prioress.
The nun took a quick look and said:
“So you are Hằng Thủy’s disciple, a good old friend of mine.
It worries me that you are traveling alone.
Please stay here and wait a few days for your teacher.”
The temple became Kiều’s new haven.
She would live on salt and greens in exchange for a carefree life.
The sutras she already knew by heart.
Altar duties, she was an old hand.
From dawn to late at night, she would go about her tasks.
She would light up the lamp late at night, and ring the bell at dawn.
Seeing that she is specially intelligent, above the norm,
the nun had high regards for Kiều, and she felt more secure.
Now, In this haven, spring’s coming to an end.
Flowers laid strewn all over the grounds; Milky Way crossed the sky.
On a clear day without clouds and winds,
the temple received a friend-of-temple visitor.
The visitor admired the golden bell and silver gong.
She commented: “These looked like those in Miss Hoạn’s house.
The prioress was concerned upon hearing these words.
Late at night, she went and asked Kiều about it.
Thinking it is difficult to hide the truth,
she told her story to the nun:
“Now that things have come to this state,
my humble self, for good or ill, I will leave in your hands.”
Giác Duyên, on hearing Kiều’s words, shook with trepidation.
She pitied Kiều but she is also afraid to keep her here.
She whispered to Kiều’s ear her thoughts:
“Here, Budda’s gate, for everyone, is wide open.
But I dread of unknown events that may happen
to cause you woe while you stay here.
Better to avoid and flee away,
than to wait for the flood water to reach your feet!”
Nearby lived a woman, surnamed Bạc
who used to go to the temple and gave offerings.
The nun sent words to her, asking her to help,
by letting Kiều take refuge for a while at her place.
Glad to find so soon a haven,
Kiều rushed in without further reflection.
She could not have suspected that the woman was a master swindler.
Dame Bạc and Dame Tú are from the same school of tricksters.
Upon seeing her beautiful face with coral-shaped lips,
Dame Bạc was silently elated at making her business’s big profit.
She concocted tales out of thin air to frighten Kiều into submission.
Disheartened, Kiều, quite a few times, shook with trepidation.
Dame Bạc affected to kick her out of the house,
and used threats to force her to marry her nephew.
“Thousands of miles from home, you are all alone,
but your bad name has spread near and far.
Our unlucky fate to be with you. You will wreck our home yet!
Who else but us would dare to harbor you in our house?
You need to hurry to find a man and get married,
or you can fly and seek refuge in heaven.
Nearby places are not convenient to arrange a marriage match.
Farther off, there is no match to be found.
Now, I have a nephew, named Bạc Hạnh.
He is my blood relation, not just any stranger.
He ran a shop in the Thai District.
He is very honest and never break his words.
You must listen to me and marry him.
Once wedded, you can move back with him to Thai District.
There, no one will know of your past.
Your will be free to do as you wish,
like a fish in the river, a dolphin in the sea.
If you are still determined not to agree,
then you are going against my wish, and misfortune will upon you visit.”
Kiều’s face darkened with gloom, her brows furrowed.
The more she heard, the more it hurts like blows.
Thinking that she had stumbled and had nowhere to go,
Kiều, at last resort, uttered her resigned thoughts:
“I am like a swallow, strayed from its flock.
Wounded by an arrow, it is afraid of curved boughs.
Having no other way out, even if I want to marry,
I would know his face, but how would I know his heart?
Just in case I fall into the hands of bad people,
one ca not be sure of anything when there are those
who made a living trading bears and tigers,
let anyone who wishes to marry me,
performs a solemn oath of trust and love.
Heaven and Earth will be the witnesses.
Then I would not mind crossing the sea with him.”
After getting Kiều’s compliance, the old woman left.
She told the news to her nephew. He immediately made wedding preparations.
The whole house was furnished and prepared for the occasion:
The courtyard swept, altar set up, vases cleaned, incense sticks lit.
Bạc Sinh knelt down hastily before the altar.
After the usual prayers, he even lavished his prayers
on the guardian spirits of the locality and the home.
In the courtyard, they revealed their hearts to each other.
The newlyweds, in their bedroom, performed red-silk-thread ritual…
After they are married, they went down a boat.
With favorable wind, the boat moved quickly to the Thái District.
When the boat was just docked in the harbor,
Bạc Sinh left first and went to the place he usually frequented.
These shops had existed forever – theyare brothels.
Organized by those packs of people who buy and sell human flesh.
They would seen the person to be sold, and set the price.
The merchandise was sold at ten times the bought price.
Some men were hired to take the merchandise back on a carriage.
Bạc took his unfaithful face and ran far away.
The carriage was placed in front of the flowery threshold.
Kiều saw an old woman came out of the house hastily.
She led Kiều to the family altar to perform the usual rites.
It was the same white-browed statue, the founding patron of the brothels.
Just one quick look was enough for Kiều to realize the situation.
Like a bird in a cage, she no longer lives free.
“Damn this unlucky fate of a peach blossom.
Knot untied, then re-tied again, so easy, like god playing a game.
Thinking about my life, I find it so pitiful and tiresome.
What good are superior talents, when they make earth and heaven jealous!”
What a shame that the murky water is being cleaned
but the mud, several times, were again thrown in.
O! The Creator and the pink-pant girl. 
You had spun her life that long and that much,
and yet, you keep on doing it and not let her go.
Since the unfortunate event forced me to leave home,
I had resigned myself and accepted whatever fate threw at me.
Young as I was, what crime had I committed
to bear the shame of a rose battered in the storm past my prime?
Knowing that I can not escape Heaven’s reserved fate for me,
I will abandon this painted face and body again in the spring of my life.
Nights passed by under the cool breeze and soft moonlight.
Then a sudden guest from the national frontier came to seek pleasure.
With tiger mustache, square chin, silkworm eyebrows,
broad shoulders and big stature,
he was plainly a majestic hero
with superior martial arts skills, and a strategic mind.
Carrying the sky on his head, and stamping the earth with his feet,
his name is Từ Hải and he came from Kwangtung.
He led an adventurous life, full of fun and dangers.
With sword and lute, he trekked mountains and sailed rivers.
On his arrival at the town, he heard of Kiều’s fame.
The girl’s story and charms moved the hero’s heart.
He brought his card to her chamber.
They both glanced at each other, liking what they saw.
Từ said, “Heart meeting heart,
I am not a gallant seeking pleasure of love for the moment.
I had heard of your beauty for a long time,
“Have your blue eyes contain the image of any one yet?
In this world, there is not many heroes,
why waste your life with the fishes in basins, the birds in the cages!
Kiều replied, “You praised me too much.
Living this life, I dare not look down on anyone!
I just want to choose the right stone to test the gold,
since I need to know to whom I can entrust my heart.
As for those who come here to take pleasure,
I have no choice in selecting the gold from the brass.”
Từ said, “Your words conveyed a great depth of heart.
It reminded me of the words of Ping-Yuan.
Come here and look at me closely.
See whether you can trust me to some degrees or not?”
Kiều replied, “You are too generous and kind toward me.
I think that Chin-yang will see a dragon in the clouds, one day.
Do have pity then for this lowly flower.
My drifting duckweed life, dare I ask for your support in the future?“
Upon hearing her words, he was pleased and nodded.
He laughed, “In this world, there are few friends of the heart.
My praise for your discerning eyes,
in recognizing a hero when he is still leading a wandering life.
By your words, you discerned who I am, apart from the rest.
When I gain great power and wealth, we will still have each together.
Two minds as one, two hearts in unison.
Love will seek love, without the need for any gifts or preparations.
He then talked to a matchmaker, and through her
paid some hundred taels to the brothel’s owner for Kiều’s freedom.
For their love nest, the couple chose a quiet place.
In it was a lavish bed, and a screen decorated with the eight gods.
The man a hero, the woman a beautiful flower.
Theyare a perfect match, like dragon and phoenix living together.
Half a year later, while they still love each other passionately,
the call of adventure, of power and glory beckon his heart.
He gazed afar at the sky and the endless sea.
Then with his sword, he jumped on the saddle and prepared to leave.
Kiều said, “A woman needs to follow and serve her man.
I am determined to go with you.”
Từ said, “We know each other’s heart.
Why have not you gotten beyond any common woman’s affections.
When I have under my command a hundred thousand soldiers,
with drums and flags to announce my arrival,
to show the world the face of an extraordinary hero,
then I will come and get you to our new home.
But now, I am just a wanderer on land and the four seas.
If you follow me, I would have more concerns, and not know where to go.
So, please wait here a while longer.
It would be at most a year later, why hurry?”
Having said that, Từ soon rode off.
With the wind behind its wings, the great eagle soared into the sky.
Kiều, left alone with her shadow, by the flowery curtains.
She lived endless nights behind bolted doors.
The moss-covered yard no longer bore any shoeprints.
The grass grew over a feet high, the willow thinner a few inches.
She missed the trees of her hometown thousands of miles away.
Her nostalgic soul flew homeward with the faraway clouds.
Her heart ached when she thinks of her old parents.
She wondered if their sorrows for her departure had lessened.
It had been ten and some years already.
If still alive, their skin must be wrinkled and their hair frost-white.
With bitter regret, she thought of her first love.
Although the lotus flower’s filament is cut, the filament of love still lingers in the heart.
If my little sister had retied the broken red thread,
perhaps by now, she already have two children.
From her exile, she thought of her distant homeland.
Thousands of thoughts and confused feelings in her mind and heart.
And again she thought of the great eagle flying high in the sky.
Her eyes had been set on the sky horizon that he had gone.
Day and night, she was waiting in silence.
Then one day, the sounds of war thundered in the region.
An atmosphere of death pervaded the town.
Rivers were full of pirates, the roads full of armored soldiers.
Friends, acquaintances and neighbors advised Kiều
to take her refuge elsewhere.
Kiều said, “I had made him a promise.
Though in danger, I do not want to break it.”
She was still wavering in her decision, when outside,
flags appeared, and voices were heard over the megaphone.
Armored solders came and stood around the house.
Several voices asked in unison: “Where is Madam?”
In two rows stood ten generals. They laid down their swords,
took off their breastplates and kowtowed in the courtyard.
Ladies-in-waiting followed, and one of them told her:
“By order of our lord, we come to escort you to see him.”
A phoenix-adorned carriage with bedecked curtain ,
worthy for a queen, was brought to the front door.
She wore a flowered hat and a brilliant red robe.
Flags unfurled, drums beaten, the procession started.
Musicians led in front, followed by her golden carriage.
Heralds rushed at the front of the procession to clear the way.
In the Southern Court headquarters, drumbeats resounded.
Flags hoisted on the ramparts, cannon shots fired from the citadel.
Lord Từ rode out to the gate to wait for his wife.
Magnificent in his new attire, he looked strangely different.
But still himself with his strong square chin and silkworm eyebrows.
He laughed: “We are like water and fish, needing each other.
Do you still remember what you would said long ago?
Only a heroine could discern a hero.
Let us see if that heart of yours is satisfied now?”
She replied: “I am just a young and inexperienced woman.
So fortunate as to have my clinging vine resting in your tree’s shade.
It is only now that I see what I would said become true,
but my heart was very sure of it since the very beginning.”
They looked at each other and laughed heartily.
Hand in hand, they went back to his tent to continue their love story.
A big feast was organized to celebrate and to reward the officers.
Drums resounded and upbeat military music were played.
With glory and honor to compensate for their past days of hardships,
their love grew warmer with the joyousness of spring each day.
At the headquarters, on a relaxing day with Từ,
Kiều leisurely told him her life story, her past misfortunes.
The times when she was in Vô Tích and at Lin-tzu, where she was
the victim of cruel deceptions and had suffered horribly.
Now that she has a life with some ease,
there is still gratitude and revenge in her heart.
Lord Từ heard her story from start to finish.
Angered at the injustice she suffered,
his fury broke out like thunder.
Troops were brought to attention, officers selected.
Under the flag, he gave the order for them to leave immediately.
Following their red flags, the troops moved swiftly.
One troop will go to Vô Tích, the other: Lin-tzu.
For those who were unfaithful to Kiều or dealt with her cruelly,
Từ gave the order to arrest and bring them in for questioning.
Then he sent a herald carrying his arrow, a symbol of his power,
to protect and ensure the safety of the Thúc family.
A sword-bearing orderly was sent to summon Thúc-Sinh.
His face seemed to change color to indigo, and his body quivered.
She said, “My debts of gratitude to you weigh a thousand
mountains. Your old friend at Lin-tzu, do you still remember?
Like the two morning and evening stars, we can not be united.
You know whose fault it was, as I would not let you down.
A hundred rolls of brocade, a thousand liangs of silver.
These gifts just show my gratitude, it has not to repay what I owed you.
Your wife is devilish and wicked.
This time the thief and the old woman he robbed will meet!
The ant had not crept around the edge of the cup for long.
Her wicked plot I will repay in full.
Looking at Thúc Sinh’s face at that moment,
one can see his face drenched in sweat, as if he would been in the rain.
His heart felt both a joy and a dread that he could not contain.
He was joyful for Kiều’s situation, but felt a deep fear for his wife.”
The housekeeper and the prioress were called in next.
After introductions, they were invited to sit in places of honor.
Kiều held their hands, and showed them her face.
And said, “Slave Flower and Pure Spring are also me!
I remember my days of misfortunes. A mountain of gold can hardly
compensate the kindness and compassion you would showed me.
These thousand taels of gold are just a token of my gratitude.
No amount of gold can balance the scale of a mother’s heart.”
Startled, the two women did not know what to say.
They were half terrified, and half happy for her.
Kiều said to them, “Please stay here for a while.
And watch how I take my revenge!”
Immediately, she ordered her soldiers to bring in the prisoners.
The lists of their offenses were also brought in.
Under the flags, soldiers unsheathed their swords.
The main culprit had the name of Hoạn-Thư.
On seeing her, Kiều greeted, saying:
“Madam, so you too have to come here today.
Among the women, very rare are those with several hands. *
In the old days, very rare are those who wear multiple faces. *
And nowadays, very rare are those that have multiple livers. *
A beautiful woman should be gentle and caring by nature.
The more wicked she is, the heavier her karmic debts.”
Fear took away Hoạn Thư’s soul and wits.
She prostrated herself and carefully chose words to implore:
“I am just a petty-minded woman.
Jealousy is just a common trait of a person.
Please think of when I let you go to the shrine,
and when you left the house, I did not pursue.
In my heart, I respect and admire you.
But sharing a husband, who would be easy to oblige who.
I regret that I had put thorns on your path.
Can your generous heart give me some mercy?”
Kiều praised, “You are a really smart and clever woman
who knows exactly the proper things to say.”
Kiều thought, “If I forgave her, her life’s fortunate.
If I do not, it would seem that I am a petty-minded person.
Well, if she already regretted her actions.”
Kiều then gave an order to free Hoạn Thư.
In gratitude, Hoạn Thư made her kowtows in the courtyard.
A line of captives bounded together by chains was led in.
Kiều said, “The High Heavens cast a wide net.
Those who harm people will be harmed. The cause is not from me.”
Firstly, Bạc Hạnh and Bạc Bà were brought forward.
On one side, it is Hawk and Hound, on the other, Sở Khanh.
Then came Dame Tú and Scholar Mã.
These criminals deserved the fates that await them.
Orders were given to the executioner.
What oaths they made, those punishments will be applied.
Blood flowed, flesh hacked to pieces.
Whoever saw was terrified.
Let it be known that everything is by the will of heaven.
Betrayal of trust is not worth it when the betrayed takes revenge.
The rogues and the cruel ones,
they reap what they sow, and no one will pity them.
The site of the executions was crowded with Từ’s troops.
The executions happened In daylight for everyone to see.
Seeing the revenges that Kiều took,
the nun, Giác Duyên, hurriedly, bid her farewell to return home.
Kiều said, “A rare chance, once in a thousand years.
Rare are the times that we old friends have a chance to chat.
We will soon be going our separate paths.
I would not know where you will be and how to visit you.”
The nun replied, “It wo not be long.
In five years, we would see each other again. I remembered the day
when I was taking a foot journey in a distant land,
I met the nun, Tam Hợp, who’s a prophet.
She told me the times that we will meet again.
This year is one, the next five years from now.
We have seen that her prediction is not wrong.
The first part realized, the second must also be true.
We still have many ties together.
Our relationship has not come to an end yet. No hurry.”
Kiều replied, “Prophecy of predestination.
Since she said it, it must be true.
If you happen to meet her again,
please ask her to foretell my fortune for me.”
Giác Duyên readily agreed,
then said farewell and left.
After gratitude repaid and revenge taken,
her heart felt light as the sea of resentment drained.
She prostrated herself before Lord Từ and thanked him:
My frail self had never dreamed of this satisfaction.
Relying on the power of your thunderous hands,
my heart is now relieved of a great weight.
Your kindness, I engraved in my bones and heart.
Even if I die for you, I would still not have paid my debt of gratitude.
Từ said, “the great men since the olden days till now
had never been able to find a soul mate even for just one day.
Bearing the name of a hero,
how could I let go of injustice that I meet on the road!
Let alone, this is a family affair.
There is no need for words of deep thanks to show your gratitude.
I still regret that your two parents
are separated from you and live in a distant place.
If I could get them to come here,
so you and them can be united, then I am happy.”
He then ordered preparations for a big feast in the camp.
Thousands of soldiers and officers gathered
to celebrate Kiếu’s redress of injustices suffered.
Từ had many military successes, one following another.
From then on, his martial might thundered far and wide.
He had his own kingdom in his corner of the sky.
With his own military and civil government, he divided the empire into two.
Several times, like sweeping wind and pouring rain,
his army broke down the walls of the five districts of the south.
Dangers and perils presented opportunities to sharpen his sword.
Those coat-hanging and rice-bag bodies were nothing to him!
He was supreme master, lord of his frontier territory.
Although there was several great lords and powerful princes,
but none dared to challenge his flying banner.
For five years, he ruled a land bordered by the sea.
There was a provincial governor, a powerful official.
He is Hồ Tôn Hiến, a statesman with many talents.
He was given the powers by the emperor
to fight the rebels at will, with the title of supreme commander.
He knew that Từ was a hero and knew that Kiều
also had a voice in the military plans.
He parked his troops in the garrison, and sent a man
with loads of gold, silver and brocade to persuade them to surrender.
For her, there were separate gifts:
two ladies-in-waiting, and thousand pounds of gold and jade.
The missive was sent to Từ Hải’s headquarters.
Lord Từ was very reluctant to surrender, saying:
“With my hands, I founded this heritage.
Since then I had been master of these seas and rivers.
If I constrain myself and returned to the Court,
A surrendered subject is not well looked upon.
Those officials are tied together by their mandarin dresses.
Is it worth being a duke and have to bend your back and bow your head.
How is it better than being the lord of your own territory.
With my military might, it is not easy for them to do anything to me.
Now, I move heaven and earth as I please.
Going any direction I want, without anyone above me.”
But Kiều, having an honest heart, easily trusted people.
Abundant gifts and sweet engaging words helped to sway her mind.
She thought that she is like a water fern,
and had lived a drifting life with many misfortunes.
“Would not it better to become the sovereign’s subject?”, she thought,
“The big road is wide enough to move one’s status to cloud’s height.
It would be good for the family and also fullfill her duties to the State.
Then gradually, we will find a way to return to my hometown.
I would officially be a grande dame.
I can feel proud of myself when with others,
and my parents would enjoy the public honors.
Duties to the State and to the family are both fulfilled.
First is filial piety and second is faithfulness to the sovereign.
This is much better than a floating raft, that would have to worry
about the ocean waves turning it upside-down.”
During a discussion of the consequences of submission,
Kiều took the opportunity to speak her opinions.
She said, “The king’s benevolence is profuse.
It would poured everywhere, and permeated everything deeply.
Merits for his works of pacification dated back a long time.
They have everyone’s gratitude in the land.
Reflect on what happened since you started warfare.
Piles of human bones along the “Vô Định” river
have reached the height of a man.
Why do this and leave a bad name for posterity?
For thousand of years, no one had ever praised the rebel leader, Huang Chao.
Would not the position of a high-ranking official be much better?
Who would turn away from the only route to fame and honor?”
Từ was persuaded by her sweet and persuasive words.
His army on the offensive changed to a surrender position.
He made arrangements to meet the Governor’s emissary.
They set a date for disarmament and terms of dismissal of his army.
Believing in the promises of the peace settlement,
flags were left unheeded, and night watches slackened.
Từ’s neglect of proper defense measures
were observed by spies from the imperial army.
Lord Hồ seized the opportunity to play his stratagem.
His troops would go behind the sending of presents for a sudden attack.
Carrying peace settlement’s banner, the imperial army advanced.
Presents of peace at the front, weapons concealed from behind.
The unsuspecting Lord Tu did not know.
Donning full ceremonial dress of a high-ranking official,
he left his camp to surrender.
Lord Ho made a secret sign to his men. 
On three sides were gunshots, and all four sides were hoisting battle flags.
Caught in a total surprise, even a tiger king
when fallen into a trap would become helpless.
Từ fought to the death in the battlefield,
to show his enemies the bravery of a supreme general.
When his great soul left to join the deities’ abode,
he still stood straight within the circles of enemies!
Firm as stone, hard as bronze,
no one can shake or move his body the slightest hair.
Imperial troops rushed forward in pursue of the defeated troops.
The smell of death rose high to the sky.
The ramparts broken, everywhere was total disarray.
Some fleeing men saw Kiều and led her to the place.
In the midst of flying arrows and stones,
she saw Từ Hải standing there immovable under the sky.
She said, crying: “You are a brave man with a clever mind.
Because you listened to me, you came to this end!
How can I have the face to see you again?
I would rather die and be with you!”
Her grief poured forth in torrents of tears.
Her words said, she threw herself, head first, upon the ground.
How strange it was - the affinity between two souls in love and wronged.
As she collapsed, the body of Từ fell down.
Some soldiers who were passing by,
took pity on Kiều and helped revive her.
She was then brought to the headquarters.
Lord Hồ on seeing her spoke kindly:
“You are a frail and defenseless girl,
In this warfare, you would suffered many blows!
Our military campaign was victorious.
For its success, you also played a part.
Now that everything had been accomplished,
what would you want to have for your rewards?”
Her pearly tears poured out even more, in streams.
Hesitantly, she expressed her thoughts and feelings.
“Từ was a great hero. 
He went his own way beneath the wide skies and roamed unchallenged in the open seas.
Believing in me, he over trusted the promises, 
and took the self that would fought hundreds of battles to become a subject of the king.
He thought that he would obtain nobility and honors for me,
and never suspected that his flesh and bones would be shattered!
For five year, he would arrogantly roved between the skies and the seas
but then his body dropped on the field like it was nothing.
You advised me to tell of my service and ask for rewards.
The more I think of it, the more grievous is my heart.
I felt that I am much more guilty than deserving.
That was why I had tried to commit suicide.
Please just reward me a modest grave,
to give the man I love his humble resting place.”
At this request, Lord Hồ felt some pity,
and gave orders for a hasty burial by the riverbank.
In the headquarters, a victory feast was held. 
Place was filled with sounds of flutes and strings, and voices of soldiers and officers.
She was ordered to serve Lord Ho behind the curtain.
He pretended to be drunk and forced her to play the lute.
Like the wind wailing, the rain weeping, so heart-rending,
it seemed the four strings dripping blood from her fingers!
The howlings of gibbons, the wailings of cicadas, can not match such sorrow.
Ho listened, frowned, and shed some tears.
Ho asked: “What is the music piece that you are playing?
It sounds so full of bitterness and sorrow!”
Kiều replied: “It’s called “Thankless Fate”.
I had composed it when I was young.
The melody was created in days long gone,
but the example of “thankless fate” is now and here before you.”
The more he watched and listened, the more enchanted he was.
What a miracle! An iron mask could become dazed with love.
He said, “We are destined for each other.
Let me reconnect your lute strings with phoenix glue.
She said, “I am just a fallen woman.
On my conscience is the unjust death of a person.
Nothing left of me, this tattered flower.
Like Hsiao-lin’s lute strings, my heart’s broken.
With your kindness, I hope to still live. 
I would be fortunate to see my native village with my dying breath.”
During the feast, the governor had drunk too much.
The next morning he woke up and remembered:
“Being a high official of the realm,
I am constantly watched by the higher authorities and the public.
It’s not becoming of my office to act like a womanizer.
So how do I settle this matter now?”
When the office opened for work,
his mind resolved, Hồ made his decision.
Who dares to protest the words of a high-ranking official?
By his order, Kiều was forced to wed a tribal chief.
O how meddling you can be, the matrimony god!
Why do you tie the red silk threads so heedlessly?”
The flowered carriage was led straight down onto the boat.
The curtain pulled down, the lamp lit.
She seemed like a willow withered, a peach blossom faded.
There was not a single spark of liveliness in her body and face.
She said to herself, “Let the sands and the waves engulf me
and waste my parents’ efforts, and waste an intelligent mind.
At heaven’s edge, drifting in the middle of the sea,
where should I send my bones to its rest?
Who had cut my silk threads of love?
Who had put the debts of fate into my hands?
Why has my life turned out like this?
Any remaining day of my life is just a wasted day!
As there is no joy in living,
then why sorrow over a loss.
I am alone with so much bitterness in life.
Let the jade be shattered, the gold melted, let it all be over!”
The crescent moon would disappeared behind the western mountains.
Kiều, alone in her cabin, kept standing up and sitting down.
Then, she heard the sudden roar of rising tides.
She asked and learned that the river was Chien-tang.
She remembered clearly the words she heard in her dream.
This’s the end, she thought, of her heart-rending fate!
Đạm Tiên, O friend, do you know I have kept our tryst?
You promised – so wait down there to welcome me.
Under the lamp, there was some flowered stationery.
She wrote a few last words to let people know.
Then she opened the curtain and looked outside.
The high sky, the wide river, a vast expanse of blue.
She wrote, “Lord Từ had treated me so well.
But ‘cause of a little state affair, I would betrayed his trust.
I killed my husband, and yet I wedded another.
How could I still have a face to stand in this world?
I would rather die and put everything to rest.
My heart I will entrust to the sky and the waves.”
She looked for one last time at the endless expanse of rising water,
and threw herself into the great river.
The tribal chief, after informed, immediately attempted a rescue.
But her body was sunken somewhere in the river.
Pity her life, just a human life like any others,
but to have such talents and beauty was to welcome jealousy and danger.
She led a wandering life bearing injustices and miseries.
What would be left of her if waiting to the end of her destiny.
So many times in fifteen years, she was a living example
of the vicissitudes of the lives of beautiful women.
A life with such misfortunes as her could not have been worse.
In accordance with the laws of nature,
after the darkest tunnel came the light.
Those people that practice filial piety and are true of heart,
when Heaven had imposed painful sacrifices,
Heaven will show pity for their lives
After taking leave of Kiều, Giác Duyên,
with her gourd and bag, took a long pilgrimage.
She met Tam Hợp, the holy nun,
and talked to her about Kiều and inquired Kiều’s fate:
“Such a loyal person and filial daughter Kiều is.
But why is her life so full of misfortunes?”
The nun replied, “Fortune and misfortune come from the laws of heaven,
but the root cause of it is from a person’s heart.
Heaven has a hand, but it also come from us.
Living a moral life is the source of happiness, all passions lead to suffering.
Thúy Kiều is lively and intelligent.
Granted, a sad lot is often reserved for a beautiful woman.
But Kiều kept holding onto man-woman love
and stubbornly enmeshed herself in its web of passions.
Thus, when she was in those peaceful abodes,
she did not stay because she could not sit still.
Demons goaded her, phantoms led her on the wrong path.
Thus she had gone on a journey of heart-rending sorrow.
After one misfortune came another.
Two times in the brothel, twice in temples.
Within the circle of raised spears and naked swords,
she lived as a maid with the wolves and the tigers.
In the middle of the tumultuous waves,
she threw herself in the water to tempt the jaws of sea dragons.
Her misfortunes had always followed her passions.
She knows her pains and the true cause of her sorrows.
She would have to live a life full of sufferings and die in exile.
A heart-rending fate until the end of her life!"
On hearing her words, Giác Duyên was terrified:
"A whole life! Alas! What would be left of her?" 
The prophetess replied, "But it does not matter.
Her fate had been reconsidered with her merits.
Judging from her past sins,
she was trapped in love but did not indulge in sexual lust.
She sacrificed her love to pay her filial debt.
She sold herself and this pious act had touched Heaven is heart.
She caused the death of one but had saved tens of thousands.
She can tell what is important and fair, and what is not.
Those merits are incomparable.
Her past sins had now been washed clean.
When appropriate, heaven knows how to be obliging.
Debt is paid first, then compensation for merits later.
Giác Duyên - remember your promise to your poor friend - 
at the Chien Tang river, you can have a raft waiting for her.
Thus, you will be faithful to your given word.
It is an opportunity from heaven to do what is blessed.
Giac Duyen, at these words, felt great joy in her heart.
She went to the Chien Tang river and settled by its shore.
She built a cabin made of wood and thatched grass, 
that faced the blue waters and laid under the the yellow clouds.
She hired for the whole year two fishermen.
Their boat anchored on the shore, and their nets casted in the river.
With a constant heart, the nun did not spare any efforts.
Fortunately, her meeting with Kieu was scheduled in heaven.
Since Kieu had plunged herself into the silver water waves, 
the currents have drifted her to this place.
The fishermen pulled up the net and saw a person.
They all saw clearly that the prophetess is words were all true!
Kieu was laid on the boat, wearing a silk dress.
Although fully drenched, she still had not lost her shine.
Giac Duyen recognized her friend is face 
but she was still immersed in heavy sleep.
Kieu is soul was floating in her dream,
When Đam Tiền saw her old friend and greeted her, saying:
"I would been waiting here for you.
For ten years and more, but it would been a waste of time.
Your fate is thin, but your merits are strong.
Despite your previous life, few can match the heart that you have.
Your faithful heart had touched Heaven.
In selling yourself, you show filial piety, 
in saving people is lives, you show altruism.
You had served the country and the people well.
Your merits have tipped the scale of justice in your favor.
Your name was withdrawn from the heartbreaking destiny list.
The heart-rending poems I will return to you.
There is still a lot of joys for you in the future.
Your past great love will be fulfilled, your life full of happiness."
Surprised and still dreamy, she did not know what to believe, 
when the words "Pure Spring" was uttered in her ears.
Startled, she wakened from her dream.
Her mind still dazed, she did not recognize anyone.
Of Đạm Tiên, not a trace of her in the boat.
But beside her, there was the nun, Giác Duyên.
They were very happy to see each other.
After the boat cleaned, they went to the grass hut.
A family together, from morning to night, 
with the moonlight and wind to cool their faces, 
and salts and greens to cleanse their hearts.
From all four sides, they had a view of vast empty space.
The tides rose in the morning and evening; 
the clouds floating in front and behind.
The pains of old woes had all been wiped from her mind.
But how would her first love know she is at this place?
Kiều is life was full of misfortunes.
Kim Trong also had his share of sufferings.
Since the day he left to help with the burial ceremony, 
he stayed in Liêu Dương for half a year, before he returned.
He hurriedly went to the Thúy garden to check things out, 
and saw that the scenery had changed so unlike before.
The whole garden was full of weeds and reeds.
The moonlit window looked so cold and empty, the walls rain-beaten.
From front to back, he did not see a single soul, 
although the peach blossoms of last year 
still smile in greeting of the east wind.
A few sparrows rustled their wings in the vacant house.
Wild grass spread all over the ground, moss covered shoeprints.
At the wall is end, several thorny bushes grew,
blocking the path that she and him last year walked through.
All around the house was in gloomy silence.
Whom can he ask to know the whereabouts of his love?
A neighbor passed by and greeted him.
Kim asked him a few discreet questions.
Asked about the father: he was involved in a court trial.
Asked about Kiêu: she sold herself to ransom her father.
Asked about their house: they had moved far away.
Then he asked about young Vương and Thuy Vân.
He was told that both of them are living in difficulties.
Sewing clothes and writing for hire to make a living.
The news were like lightning strikes in the sky.
On hearing it, Kim was dumbfounded for a moment.
He then asked where they had moved to.
Kim went to their new home and saw:
A dilapidated mud-walled cottage,
with ragged reed blinds and tattered sparse bamboo screens.
When he saw a rain-soaked grass yard full of weeds,
 the sight depressed and confused him all the more.
He ventured to call outside the wall.
Young Vương heard his voice and rushed out.
Took him by the hand and hastily led him inside.
From a back room, the parents soon appeared.
Weeping and wailing, they told Kim their woes:
"Young man, do you know what would happened to us?
Our daughter Kiều, her fate was so fragile.
She failed her promise to be your betrothed.
Faced with a terrible family disaster,
she sold herself to have the means to save her father.
She was torn with sorrow and regret when she left home.
With tears in her eyes, she told us her wish time and again.
Since she would exchanged solemn oaths with you, 
she asked her sister to take her place.
This would be to repay a little of what she owes you.
But the sorrow in her heart would last forever!
In this life, she had let you down.
In her next life, she would repay you.
Those were the words she said time and again, 
and they were engraved in our hearts before she left.
What an ill fate you have, my darling daughter.
Your beloved Kim had returned but where have you gone?"
The more they talked, the deeper their grief.
The more Kim listened, the more heartbroken he got.
His body shook violently as if unable to accept the facts.
His eyes flooded with tears, his spirit seemed absent.
His mind so distressed, he fainted many times.
On awakening, he sobbed and sobbed then fainted again.
Seeing Kim so distressed, old Vương
restrained his own grief and tried to console Kim:
The plank is now already nailed into the boat.
With her poor fate, she can not return your love.
Although you love and care for her so much, 
you must not throw away your precious life.
They tried and tried to comfort him in hundreds of ways.
But the fire of anguish, when smothered, only grew stronger.
They showed him the golden bracelets, 
and the incense and the lute of last year.
Kim, on seeing these keepsakes, missed her even more.
His heart more distressed, his anger grew.
Kim said, "It is because of my being away 
that the flower, the water fern had drifted downstream.
We had sworn many oaths with each other.
Those words of gold were not idle words.
Although we have not share a bed, we are still husband and wife.
How could my heart bear the thought of cutting the bonds with her?
No matter how much time or gold I need to spend,
while I am still alive, I will have to see her again!"
His grief can never be in words fully expressed.
Kim, still sobbing, took leave of Kieu is family.
He hurried home, and had a lodge built in the flower garden.
Then invited Kieu is parents to come and live there.
Day and night, he would inquire after their health,
like their own son, so as to fulfill Kie is love for her parents.
With ink diluted with tears, he wrote letters, 
and sent people to look for her.
So much effort and money spent.
Lin-ching, he had gone a few times.
But he searched here while she was there.
Between the vast sky and the seas, where would she be?
Kim became more and more distressed with longings and fears.
His liver was like on fire, his bosom felt like being scraped by a knife.
The silkworm, spinning its threads, day by day, became more wasted.
The cicada, under biting frost, became thinner each day.
He languished, sometimes sober, sometimes dreaming.
Tears of blood flowed from his eyes, his soul departed in a dream.
Kieu is parents were very worried and frightened.
How was it that he came to this state!
They, in haste, prepared to set a date, for the wedding of Thúy Vân and Kim.
A graceful maiden, an elite scholar.
Talented man and beautiful girl in their springs of youth.
Although Kim was happy with the marriage,
the joy of newlyweds was not enough to fully suppress his sorrow.
While eating, sleeping, coming in and out,
the more attached they were, the deeper his past love grew.
Until when would he ever stop longing for her?
His tears fell profusely, and his insides full of knots.
Sometimes, when his study room was quiet 
he would burn the incense, and play the old lute.
The silk strings moaned softly its melody of love and sorrow.
Wisps of smoke of fragrant incense floating in the air, 
the light breeze stirring the blinds.
Seemed to Kim like inside the room, by the terrace, 
the sound of her voice floated to him, 
and her silhouette appeared like a dream.
Because his heart remained true to his beloved, 
he thought of her so he saw her appeared.
While he was steeped in sorrow day and night, 
several springs and autumns had been passing by.
Now, in the capital, a literary contest took place.
Vương and Kim attended and got on the honor roll the same day.
Heaven is gate swung wide open for the path to the clouds.
Flowers greeted their steps, fragrance of glory spread to their hometowns.
Young Vương still remembered the near and distant past.
He went to Old Chung is house to repay his gratitude.
After paying the debt, to make their ties stronger, 
he married Old Chung is daughter.
Since Kim had treaded on the cloud is path to glory, 
her plight aroused his love and pity all the more.
Who had pledged with him words of love and commitment?
But now where was she for him to share his wealth and honors?
She is like a water fern drifting in the waves. 
Whereas Fortune shined on him and he sorrowed for her wandering life.
By imperial order, he was sent to work as an official in far Lin-tzu.
With his wife and children, they crossed many valleys and hills.
In his new headquarters, he lived a life of leisure. Dawn and night, 
he would enjoy playing his lute and listening to the cranes' soft cries.
One spring night, while sleeping in her bedroom, 
Vân had a dream and met her sister.
When she woke up, she told her husband.
Listening to the story, Kim is mind was half-doubting, half-believing.
He thought, "The words: 'Lin Ching' and 'Lin Tzư' 
just differed by a word, and that may have been a mistake.
Kindred souls seeking each other in a dream - 
perhaps there may be some good news in this."
In his office, Kim made inquiries from his staff.
An old secretary named Đô replied:
"This story had happened over ten years ago.
I knew clearly the names and faces of those involved.
Dame Tú and Scholar Mã went 
and bought a girl from Peking and brought back here.
Kiêu is talents and beauty were incomparable.
She could play the lute; she knew poetry and literature.
She was faithful and showed uncommon courage.
She dared to kill herself to preserve her virtue, but soon after 
fell into a trap. Her stormy life had its full share of sufferings.
Later, she was married to Scholar Thúc.
Thúc is first wife was a cruel wöman.
She kidnapped Kiêu to Vô Tích and tried to break her spirit.
Kiu escaped from their house.
Unfortunately, she met a certain family surnamed Bạc.
She was bought and then sold to a brothel.
Like a floating cloud, a drifting duckweed, she would lived her life.
Then one day, she met a man.
His bravery and intelligence above others; his might shook the sky.
He commanded over a hundred thousand elite soldiers.
They came here and crowded the citadel of Lin-tzu.
With his power, Kiêu settled all the scores of her past.
She punished her enemies, and repaid her benefactors.
Thus, she had a great reputation for justice and kindness.
Near and far, she was highly praised.
I do not know the name of her benefactor.
For this info, you can ask Scholar Thúc."
As Đô had said everything so clearly,
Kim immediately sent an invitation card to Scholar Thúc.
After greetings, Kim came directly to the point and asked Thúc:
"Where is her husband now and what is his name?"
Thúc replied: "In these wild times of war, 
I asked some questions in the camp and found out: 
the chieftain is name was Hải, his surname Từ.
He fought hundreds of battles; his strength stronger than thousands.
He met her while he was in the Thai District.
Nothing strange when sparks fly between a beauty and a genius.
He forced his way on the world for several years.
And shook the earth, startled heaven with his military might.
His army camped in the eastern region.
But I had not heard any news of them afterwards."
After he heard Kieu is story from root to branch, 
his heart was filled with weariness and sorrow.
He felt sorry for her - she was a lonely leaf in the wind.
When could she ever shake of the foul dust of her fate?
An ill-fated flower drifting downstream.
Kim sorrowed for her up-and-down life, and grieved for their parting.
The oath of olden days had been broken,
but the piece of incense still there, the lute string here, 
The soul of the lute is absent, its strings made lifeless sounds.
When could, if ever in this life, the incense flame rekindle the fragrance of their love?
While she is wandering, like a drifting duckweed, in a distant land, 
how can I live a live of luxury and comfort with a serene heart!
He thought of surrendering his seal, resigned from his office, 
then he would cross rivers and mountains to, find her.
He would venture into battlefields, and perhaps, if he enter 
into life and death situations, he can find her.
But the world is vast and the abyss is deep,
where would one find the shadow of a bird, or a fish in the sea!
While he kept waiting to hear tidings of her, 
many seasons of rain and sunshine had passed by.
Then one day, a decree printed on clouds-in-five-color sheet arrived
It is from the sovereign and clearly stated the orders:
Kim was to assume new office in Nan-ping.
Young Vương was also changed to work in Fu-yang.
They hastened to have horses and carriages prepared.
Then both families left together, as they were heading in the same direction, for their new posts.
They heard that the rebels had been crushed.
The waves stilled in Fukien, the fires extinguished in Chekiang.
On this news, Kim asked Vương to take advantage 
of the trip to the same region to find Kiều.
When they reached Hang-chow, they were able 
to obtain clear and precise news of Kieu is fate.
They were told: "On that day, the two sides fight, 
Từ was ambushed and died on the battlefield.
Not only Kiêu is great service not rewarded, 
the official compelled her to wed a tribal chief.
She threw her body, so fine like jade and pearl, into the waters.
The Chien-tang river became the grave of the beautiful girl!"
Alas! No reunion but a whole life of separation.
An entire family prosperous, but only her to suffer a fate so unjust!
To call her soul, her tablet was put up with the usual rites.
To rest her soul for the injustices she suffered, 
an altar was set up by the riverbank.
Endless silver-crested waves of rising tides rose and fell.
Looking afar, it seemed like her beautiful figure 
with arms outstretched like wings falling into the waters.
With their deep love like the sea, in a sea of grief, 
where would her incarnated soul in a seabird flew?
How strange the workings of Fortune can sometimes be.
The nun Giác Duyên somehow happened to pass by.
Startled at seeing the tablet with Kieu is name on the altar, 
she asked: "Where are you from, my friends?
"are you Kie is family or her relatives?
She is alive, so why the mourning rites?
Hearing the news, they were all astounded.
Gathered around the nun, they talked away, and asked questions:
"This is her husband, those are her parents, 
and this is her blood sister, and that is her sister-in-law.
From reliable sources, we heard of her death, 
but now you tell us this extraordinary news."
The nun said, "Karma brought us together.
At Lin-tzu earlier, then at Chien Tang river later.
When she jumped into the waters,
I was waiting for the event, and found her, then brought her home.
We take shelter within Buddha is gate.
Our shrine cottage is not far from here.
In Buddha is shade, our days passed by calmly.
But her mind is fixed on her home - she missed it so much."
Hearing this revelation, their faces brightened.
What joy could surpass this joy?
Since the leaf parted from the forest,
they had searched for her in vain in many places under the vast sky.
It was plain that the flower had fallen, its fragrance gone.
Maybe in the next life, they would see her, but in this life, there was no hope. 
The world of shadows, the world of the living, two separate paths, for sure.
A miracle it was to see the person from the Nine Springs  in this world of dust and daylight.
They all prostrated themselves before Giác Duyên and thanked her.
Then together on foot, they followed the nun to her cottage.
They cut and cleared their way through the reeds and tall grass.
To be so close to their beloved, they still have some doubt.
Following the riverbank with several twists and turns, 
they left the forest of reeds to arrive at the courtyard of Budda is shrine.
Giác Duyên raised her voice to call Kiều.
From an inner room, Kiều rushed out.
With a glance, she saw her entire family was here.
Her father still looked strong, her mother still a beauty.
Both her sister and brother had grown up well.
And over there was Kim, her love of long ago.
Could this moment be a reality?
Clearly her eyes wide open, and yet it seemed like a dream.
Her pearly tears wetted her dress. She felt unspeakable joy, 
and shame, and sorrow - a whole complex of feelings.
She threw herself upon her mother is knees, and weeping. 
she told her mother all her misfortunes:
"Since my wandering in a distant land,
the duckweed would drifted under the storms for fifteen years.
I thought I was forever lost among the muddy river waters, 
and would not be able to see you again in this lifel"
Her parents held her hands and gazed at her face, thinking:
Her face looked the same the day she left home.
But after living a life with so many adversities, 
she had lost about three or four tenths of her freshness.
What scale can be used to meäsure their happiness?
They talked and talked about their joys, their sorrows, and various other things.
Her brother and sister also asked her this and that.
Watching them, Kim is sorrow turned into joy.
They all knelt down before Buddha is altar 
and gave thanks for Kieu is resurrection.
They sent for carriages decked with flowers.
Old Vương told Kiều to come home with them.
Kieu said: "I am just a fallen flower.
Half of my life, I would tasted shame and bitterness in all its flavors.
I would thought I would live out the life of a drifting water fern, or a wandering cloud.
How could I still hope to be among you again?
That I can see you again in this return to life, 
already satisfied the longings in my heart since long ago.
I would found a home within Buddha is gate.
To live with grass and tree is fitting for my age.
For meals, I am used to salts and greens.
For dress, I love the nun is drab garb is color.
My heart is fire is quenched for the things in life.
For what, would I want to crowd myself in the world of pink dust!
Leaving things half-done is not good.
I have been practicing Buddha is teachings and should continue. 
l owe the nun a sea-deep debt for saving my life.
How can I have the heart to leave her?"
Old Vương said, "That was then, this is now.
Religious practices oftentimes have to yield to circumstances.
If you want to pray to the deities or to Buddha, 
then filial duty, and love is debts, those duties who would discharge?
We owe the nun who save your life deep gratitude.
We will build a Buddha shrine and invite her to live there."
At this exhortation, she had to comply to his wish.
She took leave of the nun and left with her parents.
The whole family came to Kim is living quarters.
A banquet was immediately prepared to celebrate family reunion.
After everyone had some drinks of mum wine and feeling mellow, 
Vân stood up and said a few words:
"In this union that heaven had made,
you two met, and a word bonded you to each other.
When our family was facing the stormy waves of disaster, 
you took your love troth and put it on me.
I had since then made your love pledge my duty.
Besides, we are of the same flesh and blood.
For the last fifteen years, we would been wishing and nursing hopes 
that one day we would be living with you again.
Now that the broken mirror is made whole, 
it seemed Heaven have arranged to reunite your love.
Love for you had always remained in Kim is soul and heart.
There is the silver moon, and there is the old oaths:
The plum fruit still remains fresh and delicious.
Let us prepare a wedding for you, our dearest."
When Vân would finished, Kiêu immediately rejected the suggestion:
"An old story so long, long ago. Why talk about it now?
Although there is an oath of olden days,
I would been living a life beaten by the wind and rain.
Talking about it would make me die of shame.
Let those things follow the ebbing tide out out to sea."
Kim replied: "What you just said is very strange.
Even if that is your desire, what about your promise?
A solemn love pledge had been made between us 
in the presence of the deep earth and the wide sky.
Whatever changes may occur in the world and in our life, 
in life or death, we need to keep our faithful pledge.
Had my heart ever done anything to let down your heart, 
that you want to break our love into two."
Kiều replied, "A married life in love is harmony, 
who would not love to have?
think that in the marriage between husband and wife, 
the flower bud should be offered unbattered by the wind, 
and the moon should reflect its full round image in the mirror.
The word chastity is priceless, and virginity invaluable.
Under the nuptial torch, I would be ashamed of myself for your love.
Since misfortune first befell me, many butterflies and bees 
I had been with, and this truth makes me feel very ugly.
For so long battered by the stormy winds and the heavy rains, 
what flower would not wither, what moon would not wane?
There is no beauty left in this body.
I considered my life done and do not hope for anything.
Just thinking of marriage, I would feel ashamed 
to take this dirty self to join with an honorable scholar.
I know that you are a faithful and loving man,
but to see the nuptial torch would make me felt very ashamed.
From now on, I will close the autumn door of heart is love.
Although not being a nun, I would live like a nun!
If you still insist on our love
then you can change it into a friend-of-the-heart relationship
Talking about wedding and marriage
only distress my heart and make me feel plainly dirty!"
He replied, You do have a clever tongue with words, 
but what is right or wrong also depends on circumstances.
In all times, in the role of a woman, 
the meaning of chastity also has three or seven paths.
Sometimes in normal situations, sometimes in special conditions.
There is nothing that say we must follow any one particular way.
As for you, filial piety becomes your chastity.
There is no dust that can ever make you dirty.
Heaven has allowed us to meet again this day.
The fog had dissolved, the clouds had dispersed in the sky.
A fading flower yet fresher than ever.
A waning moon yet brighter than ten full moons of long ago.
Please do not hold in your mind any more doubts.
Let me not become a forlorn passerby like the Tiêu of olden times, ignored by his beloved."
After hearing his pleadings and arguments, 
her parents also sided with him.
She had no choice but to accept.
She hung her head and breathed sighs of resignation.
After the reunion banquet,
nuptial torches were lit up and pink silk curtains stretched.
The couple exchanged ritual greetings with their family.
All the rites were performed and they were married.
In the bridal chamber, they made several toasts.
They felt a mix of joy and wondering for their new union, yet tinged with the sorrow and regret of their past love.
Since she was a young peach blossom, a lotus flower, 
fifteen years had passed until they are now together.
The past love, the parting and the reunion,
a mix of feelings filled their hearts as the moon rose high.
Brocade curtain dropped in the late night.
Under the lamp, her peach-blossom cheeks looked silky fresh.
Lover meeting lover again. 
Flower and bee of olden times still have lot of affection for each other.
She said, "I had accepted my lot.
And did not want anything for this self that I threw away.
But because of your love for me since the olden days, 
had complied to your wish for this wedding.
But in my heart, I am very ashamed.
I feel I am wearing a brazen face that I can hardly bear to see. 
I do not mind the outward marks of a married couple is affections 
to honor our relationship in the eyes of the world.
But regarding the usual habit of people,
gathering used fragrance from dirt, picking a wilted flower, 
all these acts to me are foul and made me feel ashamed and hurt.
No longer would it be love, but it is hatred that remains.
When you make love, I would feel ashamed of myself.
To love then is ten times worse than to let one another down.
Regarding the heirs for keeping the family lineage, 
there is still my sister, Vân, your wife.
Of the chastity in my heart, there is still a little left.
Please cherish it and not try to step on and shatter it.
You still have lot of loving with my sister, 
what is good about playing with a wilted flower?"
Kim replied, "We were bonded by our pledge, but suddenly 
like fish in the sea, and bird in sky, we missed out each other.
I felt lot of regret when thinking of your wanderings.
And thought that our solemn oaths had caused you a lot of pain.
We loved each other, and had risked death, 
and now we see each other again, and still in love.
You are still in your spring of life.
I thought that you have not gone beyond the physical bonds of love.
Your soul is mirror is clear without a speck of dust. 
a word from you made me respect you more.
For so long, I had searched the ocean to find a needle, 
cause I truly love you, and not for pleasure of flesh or beauty of flower.
Who would have thought that we would unite again under one roof.
We do not have to share blanket and pillow to be a loving couple.
After she heard him, she fixed her dress, put on her brooch, 
and made a deep bow to him, saying:
"My cast-away self is now being purified, 
thanks to the generosity of a noble gentleman.
The words that you said touched my heart deeply.
To understand me like that, you are a true friend of my heart!
There are many ways to take care and protect,
but the chastity of a lifetime that I can keep is because of today."
They then held each other is hands.
They love their spouse is integrity and felt drunken with Love.
They lit up another candle and burned more incense.
Together, they drank and touched cups with one another.
Feelings of past love and present fill the mind and heart.
Kim leisurely asked her about her lute music.
She said, "Cause of these lute strings,
my life would been tangled with the threads of misfortune until now!
I had repented but it was already too late!
However, I will play it for you one more time."
On the lute strings, her elfin fingers plucked and danced.
Incense smoke rising, music melody floating near and far.
Which melody is it that sounds so warm with gentle sunshine, 
was it Trang Sinh dreaming of a butterfly or was it the butterfly?
Which melody is it that flowed the, sweet music of love.
Was it the soul of the king of Thuc or the cooing of a cuckoo bird?
So clear like the sound of pearls dropping on a moon-lit bay.
So warm like the sun shining on the jade of Lantian mountain.
Listening to the five tones of her lute,
not a note that did not sound beautiful and heart-stirring.
He asked: "which hand is playing this piece?
How come it was so sad then, but now so gay?
Is it because of the feelings in one is heart,
or is it because the end of sorrow and the coming of joyous days?"
She replied: "Cause of this little talent,
the heart-rending notes had harmed my life for so long!
I just played it this one last time for my bosom friend.
Then I will unstring the lute and put it away."
They have not yet finished their conversation,
when the crowing of a rooster announcing the dawn is heard.
Of their secret pact, Kim told the family.
Everyone was surprised and praised her.
A woman of noble mind she is, not any flirting woman 
having peach in morning and plum at night.
They had both love and friendship.
Although not sharing a bed, they shared music and poetry.
Sometimes they would drink together or play chess. Sometimes 
they would watch blooming flowers or wait for the moon to rise.
All their wishes had come true in this life.
Their marriage is also a bonding of intimate friendship.
They remembered their promise and built a temple.
Then sent a relative to invite the nun Giác Duyên.
But when the messenger arrived, he saw the cottage locked.
The moss would grown through cracks, and grass spread on the rooftop
The nun would gone to gather medicinal herbs in a distant land.
The cloud would flown, the crane would fled, where would they find her?
But with their gratitude to the nun, 
the incense in the temple is lit day and night.
Kieu is family enjoyed both wealth and honor.
Kim moved to higher rank every few years.
Vân gave him several heirs, 
and took good care of the children.
They enjoyed wealth, honors that no family could compare.
Their house of happiness and joy left its memory for thousands of generations.
Upon reflection, everything is by the will of Heaven.
Heaven has given us a human life with a body and a fate.
If he doomed us to roll in the dirt, then we would roll in the dirt.
Only when he gives us nobility then we can live a noble life.
Heaven does not show favoritism to anyone.
No one blessed with both superior talents and wonderful destiny.
Thus, do not be arrogant of your special talents. 
Remember the words talent and disaster have the same rhyme.
We all carry karma in our life.
So, do not blame on heaven for your unhappy lot.
The root of goodness comes from the heart.
The true heart worth more than all the talents combined.
Crude words, strung together, and long-winded.
Hopefully, it will give you a few pleasant hours in the long night.
    