I burst out laughing, upon considering it, at the fickleness of human affections.
Oh, you, whoever you may be, be silent and listen!
Learn the lessons of the past to avoid the misfortunes of the future!
The principal virtues in man must be fidelity and flial piety.
Chastity and modesty are the principal virtues of woman.
In the district of Đông Thành lived a man
who practiced humanity and virtue diligently. Early on he had a son blessed with an intelligent and upstanding nature.
He called him Lục Vân Tiên.
At just sixteen years of age the young man assiduously applied himself to hiss studies
Under his Master's guidance, he gave himself up entirely to the study of the Classics.
Without a care for day or night, he toiled without respite inside the school
In his writing, he cound have been compared to phụng the bird or dao the dragon when they soar aloft,
and, as for the art of warefare, he was unrivaled in the practice of the three lược and six thao.
Out of the blue, the edict is proclaimed announcing the commencement of the examinations.
Vân Tiên enters the inner chamber, thanks his Master and asks permission to return to his family.
“Since I have been living ¡n this holy retreat,
my body, he says, has gained in vigor,and my mind has been enriched.
Today I shall attain the summit of my hopes!
Nowadays, there is not oner among us who does not seek to conquer his place in the world.
I shall reach the nhạn bird flying high in the clouds,
to win fame and carry my Master's renown far and wide!
Every man, when young,
wants first to pay his debt of gratitude to his parents, then he looks for glory”
The venerable Master mulls the misfortunes [he foresees].
“I have meditated on your fate, he says. The examination period still lies far off for you.
I dare not bring to light the hidden designs of Heaven,
[but] it flls me with compassion, and my heart suffers for you!
Even though it must later be given to you to tell that which is murky from that which is clear,
I must find some way to protect you [from harm].
Now, O my son! You are descending into the worldly arena,
I shall give you these two talismans to assure you of the aid of the spirits. Wear them on your person.
Should you have the misfortune to find yourself in dangerous predicaments,
you will cross rivers safely, you will climb mountains in peace!”
“The Master returns to his chambers.
Vân Tiên remains undecided, in still greater perplexity.
“I do not know what stands in the way [of my career], he says to himself,
and makes my venerable Master say the hour of the examinations is still far off for me.
Do I owe this delay to some family trouble,
to the inadequacy of my virtue, to my inability?
For a long time now I have directed my efforts toward the study of literature.
If do not succeed this time, which examination will I have to wait for?
I do not know what is good or bad for me!
The best thing to đo is to ask for a full explanation from my Master
in order to know the whole story,
then, tomorrow, with my mind at peace, I shall begin my long journey”
The venerable Master was seated, he was sighing!
Watching in the study hall, he sees the young man returning.
“Before you, he says to him, lies a long journey.
Why have you not yet loaded your bags onto your shoulders, and what motive brings you back?
Perhaps some doubt lingers [in your mind]
as to what I have revealed to you about the examination period, which, for you, is still far away?”
Vân Tiên, kneeling, replies:
My parents are already terribly advanced in years!
O my Master! Reveal my fate to me clearly!”
At these words, the venerable Master feels his compassion redouble.
Taking his student by the hand, he brings him outside and shows him the moon
“Like the moon in the sky, so the affairs of men:
although it shines everywhere,
its light is clouded today, bright tomorrow, now it wanes, now it is full",
Later on, O my son, you will understand all this clearly.
What is the point of questioning your Master ahead of time?
Your fate is wholly drawn towards your success in the examinations.
And now Khôi tỉnh has risen, then Tử vi, brighter still!
But alas! The Horse is still far away!
“The Hare has hardly emerged from the shadows, the Rooster has crowed the coming of day.
When, upon arriving in the northern region,
you see a Rat on your path, you will then be able to obtain glory.
If, later, your name gains renown,
you will understand the truth of what your Master says about your future advancement,
Keep your heart pure, and do not worry about others”
to find a companion there and rest his [weary] limbs.
But what is the meaning of these cries, this strident lamentation?
Why are they running towards the forest? 'Why are they climbing the mountain?
“Friends carrying your children away on your shoulders,
he says, why do you flee, running like this without stopping?”
“Who is this young man?” says the crowd.
“Is it another of those Sơn Đài chasing us?”
Tiên continues: “What is going on?
At these words uttered in a calIm and gentle voice,
the fugitives call out to each other, they stop and explain everything.
“It is because there is a gang of bandits, they say.
“The chief is called Đỗ Dự, and his by-name is Phong Lai.
Mount Sơn Đài is their haunt,
everyone fears them, and no one can stand up to them.
Now, after coming down [from the mountain], they are ravaging our homes.
“They spotted two beautiful girls on their way and seized them,
no one in the village dared say a word.
We are moved with compassion at the thought of these two unfortunates!
Whose is this child, whose person is full of charms,
her reddish cheeks, her brow well formed, and her beauty ravishing?
We fear she must endure the outrages of these bandits!
Itis a terrible shame to see a distinguished maiden insulted by wretches!
But enough! We do not dare prolong this conversation!
Let us flee for fear of falling into the clutches [of these bandits] ourselves!”
Vân Tiên feels a terrible wrath welling up in his breast",
He finds out where the gang is currently camped.
“I intend to muster the strength of a hero, he says,
to take this girl away from the misfortune that has befallen her!”
“This gang, says the crowd, is still near here,
but we can tell from your face you are but a weak child?,
You are going to fail, we fear, in your foolish undertaking,
and bury yourself in the [tiger's] cave in vain”.
Vân Tiên approaches the road side,
he breaks a tree in two, fashions a rod out of it, and apprising the village, runs off.
“Cruel company, he cries out,
beware of troubling the people and causing them harm!”
Blood rushes to the cheeks of Phong Lai.
"Who is this bold young man who comes prowling around here in our midst? he says.
"The misfortune that lies in store for you, you're asking for it yourself!"
[Then] he orders his gang to place the young man in an insurmountable enclosure.
To his right, to his left, Vân Tiên swoops down on [his foes],
like Triệu Tử breaking through the circle of his foes in the land of Dương Dang.
So, too, that of the bandits is broken up on every side.
Some throw their spears, some their sabers, all look for a way out and flee straight ahead.
Phong Lai, before he can blink twice,
is struck by Tiên's rod and passes on.
Having subdued this blackhearted gang, Vân Tiên
cries out: “Who is that wailing and weeping at the rear of this wheeled cart?”
“We are honorable persons, a voice replies,
whose bad luck has flung them into the bandits' clutches.
But cramped in this wheeled cart, it is hard for us to explain,
I humbly beseech you, come to the aid of my mistress!”
Vân Tiên feels his heart moved by these words.
“I have dispersed this band of brigands, he replies.
Remain calmly seated where you are, be careful not to come outt
or you are maidens, and I am a man.
To what family do this lady belong?
Where were you heading when misfortune struck you out of the blue?
I do not know your given name and surname.
What are maidens doing in this place?
All of that is still unknown to me.
Which ofyou is the servant, and which the mistress? Kindly enlighten me”
“I am Kiểu Nguyệt Nga, replies [one of the two girls].
This is my servant, her name is Kim Liên.
I hail from the district of Tây Xuyên,
and my father is the prefect of Hà Khê,
He sent me, through soldiers, a letter ordering me to come back.
“They will lead me to Hà Khê, where my marriage is to be contracted.
Could a girl stand up to her fathers wishes?
Even if I'd been a thousand đặm away I'd have obeyed all the same!
Now, the plan has been foiled!
Had I been able to foresee this, I would not have set forth.
Having fallen into danger, I had no way out.
Alas! in a flash  saw this marriage plan evaporate!
Kindly sit down for a little while before my wheeled cart, friend,
so that your humble servant may pay you her respects and then tell you her thoughts.
Hà Khê is not far from these parts,
come there with me and I shall be able to express my gratitude for the service [you have rendered me].
We have met in mid-journey,
and I have nothing here, neither objects nor money nor gold!
I would like to requite you for your beneficence,
but how am I to show as much gratitude as my heart desires?”
“These words immediately bring a smile to Vân Tiên's lips.
“When one is helpful to someone, he says, is it with an eye to a reward?
Now I grasp [your intentions] clearly,
bụt does one consider what one stands to gain [from rendering a service]?
I recall these words: 'See good and don't do it";
whosoever acts that way is not a heroic man!
You now know where I stand on this matter.
Is there then any need for me to accompany you?”
Nguyệt Nga understands that he is resolved not to follow her,
she asks the young man to tell her his name so as to reward him [later on].
“I'm going to set off, she says,
and I do not know where you hail from, friend!”
how could Vân Tiên remain unmoved? What heart could resist?
“I hail from Đông Thành, he says,
my surname is Lục, my given name Vân Tiên”
Nguyệt Nga is a young woman of virtuous nature.
No sooner has she heard these words than with her hand she pulls a pin from her hair.
“Now, she says, my heart has met a heart that understands it.
Allow me to give you this, which you shall keep as a pledge of my trust.”
Vân Tiên turns his head away, he does not look [at the pin].
Nguyệt Nga steals a peek at hìm, and her modest reserve increases.
“This is but a trifle! she says.
Your humble servant hasn't finished expressing her thought, and already you turn away!
It is true, this pin is quite insignificant!
You are right to disdain it, but why turn your eyes away from it?”
Vân Tiên is hard put to remain silent.
“How adept you are at arousing passion in my heart! he says with a sigh.
“The service I have done you is a trifle, and your gift is superb!
In such an encounter, in mid-journey,
a word from you is welcome, worth more than a thousand pieces of gold.
I recall the passage that says: "Treasure duty, despise riches.'
So could I then ever accept a thing?"
Nguyệt Nga replies: "Alas! Poor girl that I am,
I do not yet grasp the import of things, perhaps I have offended you!
Who could think a hero
would cast a glance at a hairpin? Oh! that pin! I'm ashamed of it!"
And she repeats, sighing: “Poor pin! Alas! [poor] pin!
You have no grace, who would take you! Who would want you!
I presented you with a pin, and your eyes turned away from it,
so allow your humble servant to offer you a farewell poem.”
Vân Tiên turns his gaze back to her. “Yes! he exclaims.
Oh! Inscribe those verses! Make haste, don't delay!”
“I am humbly at your service” Nguyệt Nga answers straightaway.
Her hand descends onto the paper, she writes eight lines of five characters each;
then, when she has finished she says: “Now allow your servant to present them to you,
for she eagerly wishes to know your opinion of her talent in poetry".
Vân Tiên looks at the verses and finds them admirable.
“Who would have thought, he says, that a frail maiden could attain such talent?
To the swiftness of their composition is added the elegance of their style.
If she is not equal to Tạ Nữ, she can at least rival Tây Thi.
They flow smoothly, their composition is distinguished.
Surely, in matters of talent, this maiden is second to no man!
But who [of the two of us], in these circumstances, could stand to be outdone by the other?”
Vân Tiên likewise composes a poem and presents it to [Nguyệt Nga],
who, whilst reading it, grasps the young man thoughts perfectly.
The harmony of figures is perfect, everything fits artistically!
“The road is long, says Vân Tiên, it goes on as far as the eye can see,
but we all live under the same sky!
We meet, we tell cach other everything, and so be it!”
Văn Tiên bids farewell; he turns away.
Nguyệt Nga sighs: “Love! she says, O love!
When I think about myself, a profound despondency overcomes me,
for I have not expressed my fondness and here I am smitten with love!
I am overwhelmed by the longing to join [with this young hero]!
How adeptly he has succeeded in entwining my sad heart in these mysterious bonds!
O Nguyệt Lão! I call upon you!
I want to devote my life to him; this is the price of my happiness"
How, O Ngưu Lang! Can I love you so much?
How can Chức Nữ heart thus yield to you?
But enough! Kim Liên! O my young sister!
Set the wheeled cart in motion, take your older sister to Hà Khê!”
Then they took off upon byways known only to the hare and the wild goat,
the birds screeching, the vượn baying, springs, mountains everywhere!
“Keep me pure, O heavens above! cries Nguyệt Nga,
so that my heart will remain true to this young man my whole life long!"
But suddenly they arrive at the prefect's palace.
At the sight of them, Kiếu Công is seized with a thousand questions.
“Where, he exclaims, are the servants who accompanied you, O my daughter!
And for what reason are you traveling all alone?”
Nguyệt Nga recounts the adventures that occurred on her journey.
Kiếu Công thinks about this matter and shows displeasure,
Nguyệt Na still turns these sad and amorous thoughts over in heart
“[O my father! she says,] what does fatigue matter to your child?
Ah! Would that [could requite that young man for the service [he rendered me]!"
Kiểu Công hears her and feels moved to compassion.
“For the time being, O my daughter! Be at peace with yourself', he says to her.
When I have finished attending to public matters,
I shall write to that young man and invite him here.
I promise to settle that debt, and it will all be for the best.
Meanwhile retire to our inner chambers
so that peace may come to your heart and joy to your old father's!"
In the west wing, the drum has already sounded the third watch,
and still Nguyệt Nga bemoans her sad fate.
She leaves her chambers, goes to the flower garden,
and gazing up at the moon, full of emotion at the memory of the one she loves,
she exclaims with a sigh: “Swift waters, lofty mountainst
When will come the day when my friend voice will be audible to my ears?
The more I think about my love, the more he grows in my heart!
O vast earth! O huge sky!
How could I have let myself in for this bond of sorrow?”
She goes back in, takes up her brush and inkkwell,
arranges an altar with incense and makes her prayer to the spirits,
calling them to witness the sincerity of her heart.
She draws a portrait, a likeness of Vân Tiên,
then, groaning, cries: “Mountains and rivers, so far, far away!
This good deed is engraved in my heart, but a dark sadness mingles with our marriage plans!"
In the sequel, we shall speak at length of the young woman;
for the time being, let us return to the young man.
Vân Tiên, after parting with Nguyệt Nga,
met a man on the road who was heading to the capital.
He looked at him from a distanee. His complexion was dark black,
his size colossal, his appearance strange and terrible.
Tiên recalls the phrase: “The duckweed and the water have come together."
And here indeed, one hero has just met another!
“I đo not know your name, he says,
To what end do you travel alone, carrying your bags?”
The traveler replies: "I'm going to the exams too!
My name is Hớn Minh, I hail from Ô Mi.”
Vân Tiên can tell good from evil [by the face],
he knows a strange face is a sure sign of superior talent.
“In books one reads [the words]: 'Bonds of friendship,' he says.
In these parts I have found one, how could I disregard it?
A single tree is not enough to make a forest.
I want us to take up together.
Not far from here is a temple,
After having learned each others names and families,
the two young men took leave of each other and went on their way.
Hớn Minh left first and proceeded to the examinations.
As for Vân Tiên, he went back to his village first to visit his parents.
Rejoicing, they exclaimed: “Here is our son at long last!
Your aged father never stopped thinking about you, your aged mother was constantly waiting for you.
Since you have devoted yourself to the study of literature,
has your heart hardened? Can you, with sure steps, attain honor and success?”
Vân Tiên bows and answers respectfully:
“Though I do not surpass the men of yore, at least I am not inferior to those of our day,
O my father! O my mother! May your minds be at peace!
Allow your son, who has finally returned, to repay all the blessings he has received from you.”
At these words, his parents joy is redoubled,
though tinged with worry, (earing difficulties for their son on such a long journey.
“They give him a young lad for a servant to accompany him,
and write a letter, which they instruct him to take with him.
“Some time ago, they tell him, we decided your marriage
to [the daughter of a] retired mandarin who dwells in Hàn Giang.
Her name is Võ Thể Loan,
she is hardly fourteen years old, beautiful and graceful.
As it says in books: 'Hồ and Việt now form but one family'!
When you get there, you will deliver this letter to her address.
If you climb the ladder to success,
the bonds of matrimony are tied for you in advance”
Hardly have his parents finished giving him their instructions
when Vân Tiên sets forth with his young servant.
The monsoon has driven away the spring, now summer has taken its place,
and all they see along the road is trees!
The bee makes its dull buzzing heard, the cicada shrills on and on;
and then there is water, then there are mountains!
“The troubled water rolls its waves along, the mountains around them hold up their great rocks.
A bird warbles on a branch, a fish frolics deep in the water.
The landscape is a well-drawn picture, which is embelished by the handsome young men.
So it is that they suddenly arrive in Hàn Giang.
Vân Tiên introduces himselfand promptly hands over his letter.
Võ Công peruses it
and delights in the thought of the prospective union.
He casts a glance at Vân Trên face and demeanor,
and congratulates himself that the Lục family, favored by fate, has given birth to this son
with his well-formedi brow, eagle eyes and red lips!.
He has an elegant figure, is in good health and flawless.
Công had feared his daughter and Tiên lived too far apart.
Who would have thought that one day they could form such a harmonious couple'?
How graceful they both are!
The beautiful daughter is accomplished, the future husband irreproachable!
“The son-in-law who has come to me is most welcome here, says Võ Công.
Before addressing affairs of State, we must settle those of the family”
Vân Tiên replies: “Thanks to your kindness, O my father-in-law,
when I have overcome the great hurdle [of the examinations], the small hurdle [of marriage] will not cause me any worry.”
"As you are resolved to go to the examinations, says Võ Công,
why don't you take a companion and go there together?
Near here dwells a son of the Vương family,
his name is Tử Trực, he has devoted his life to the study of literature.
I have ordered one of my servants to go and invite him to come
so that you can try your at some compositions together.
We shall find out vhich of you proves the more adept,
and you can then become companions.”
At this juncture, Tử Trực arrived.
Võ Công had prepared in advance a flask of good spirits.
“Up to you, my children! he said to them.
He who composes the better verses will promptly be rewarded with these good spirits.
I want Trực to vie with Tiền.
Take this line for your subject: "The duckweed has wed the water”
The two young men, sitting side by side, started in on the contest.
The Lục and Vương families vied to show their talent.
Now it happened that the two of them proved of equal aptitude,
and Bạch Hàm was in no wise second to Như Oành.
“Here you are, said Công, a branch of camphor and a branch of cinnamon!
They certainly deserve the honors of the golden board and the silver plaque!
If the bell is not rung, it will make no sound,
and for a lamp to shed light, its wick must be lit!
No doubt about it, you will be pillars of the State later on.
While under the rays of the moon the branches of the mulberry trees cast their long shadows,
Vân Tiên greets them and takes his leave, then instantly sets off on his journey,
at the very moment the sun's rays are about to shine forth.
Thể Loan, in a modest, graceful attitude, stands at the entrance to the garden.
“The favorite of my heart is going to seek glory,she says.
Your love shall not leave my heart, my thoughts will follow you always!
You are going to travel very far, allow me to say a few words to you!
In these days in which an enlightened lord rules the world
may the divine phoenix reach the ngô đồng tree!
What does it matter if I, a humble and hardly attractive girl,
should wait for you for months on end, spend countless days yearning for your return?
take me for your wife, and my heart will be satisfied!
Do not forsake me for another companion:
charmed by the pear tree, forget not the pomegranate; drawn to the moon, put not the lamp aside!"
“When the flames are rekindled, says Tiên,
can one put several hearths in a single kitchen?
While under the rays of the moon the branches of the mulberry trees cast their long shadows,
Vân Tiên greets them and takes his leave, then instantly sets off on his journey,
at the very moment the sun's rays are about to shine forth.
Thể Loan, in a modest, graceful attitude, stands at the entrance to the garden.
“The favorite of my heart is going to seek glory, she says.
Your love shall not leave my heart, my thoughts will follow you always!
You are going to travel very far, aÌlow me to say a few words to you!
In these days in which an enlightened lord rules the world
may the divine phoenix reach the ngô đồng tree!
What does it matter if I, a humble and hardly attractive girl,
should wait for you for months on end, spend countless days yearning for your return?
If you achieve fame,
take me for your wife, and my heart will be satisfined!
Do not forsake me for another companion:
charmed by the pear tree, forget not the pomegranate; drawn to the moon, put not the lamp aside!"
When the flames are rekindled, says Tiên,
can one put several hearths in a single kitchen?
How skillful whosoever can predict the fortunes and misfortunes of life!
“In books, says Loan, one reads
these expressions: 'Guard your chastity', ;Have a seemly appearance.'
I wish to be chaste and faithful my whole life long.
Cut of from the world like Trang Tử, I shall wait for you, withdrawn, like Vương Nghi, in solitude.”
Thể Loan makes haste to withdraw,
Vân Tiên takes up his bags and promptly leaves for the examinations.
Hardly has he walked a dặm
when he comes upon Vương Tử Trực, and they continue their journey together.
They cross marvelous waterways and lovely mountains
[that are] as joyful as the fish that quivers, as the dragon that soars into the clouds.
These two scholars, in the middle of this charmingncountryside,
seem sons of immortals roaming whither they please on Mount Bồng Lai.
In each other's company, in order to soften the memory [of their native land] a litte,
they empty a few glasses of spirits and compose some lines of poetry.
Their familiar conversation touches on various topics.
he can, i£ he pleases, frolic in the swell and gambol in the clouds!"
“The hồng and the hộc fly together, rejoinns Tiên,
but should not the latter, with weary wing, turn back, forsaking its companions?”
Whilst conversing thus,
they caught sight of the capital, they were nearing their destination.
As the sun was declining towards the horizon,
the two friends set off in search of an inn to rest up for the examinations.
But suddenly they chance upon some old acquaintances!
Each gives his name so as to get to know one another without further ado.
One of them lives in the district of Phan Chương,
his name is Trịnh Hàm; he is a man of ordinary literary acumen.
The other resides in the phủ of Dương Xuân,
his name is Bùi Kiệm, he is about twenty years old.
Our two companions have found two more;
all of them enter the inn full of cheer and roaring with laughter.
“Vân Tiên renown, says Kiệm, had spread all the way to us,
now that we see him in person, our wish has come true!"
“[However], adds Hâm, we still don't know how gifted he is.
Let him compose a piece of verse, then we will have the real measure of his talent!”
Straightaway he summons the innkeeper.
“Make your arrangements, he says to him, to serve us a suitable meal”
“Meat and fish, said the innkeeper, I have plenty of all that!
Here are some tobacco leaves seasoned with aglaia,
a bottle of tuyết điểm, a flask of cúc hương.
This is all reserved for rich and noble guests,
After this excellent meal, whilst drinking their spirits and tea,
our four companions sit down side by side and compose verses.
Kiệm and Hâm were as if stuppeffed
when Tiểu and Trực, after hardly an hour, were already finishing up their poems!
Kiệm and Hâm were overcome with anmazement at seeing that
and suspected their companions had reproduced old verses.
They did not know why the innkeeper was
striking the mat with his hands and roaring with laughter.
“Who are you laughing at, Mr. Innkeeper?” said Tiên.
“I'm laughing, said he, about men of yore without literary talent!
I'm laughing about the improvident Tôn Tấn,
who saw the traps Bản Quyền had laid and could not elude them!”
“That is lofty stuff indeed! said Trực.
Would you happen to know the Kinh and the historians in detail?"
“They are my familiars! replied the innkeeper,
and I cannot read them without feeling moved!
Since you ask, I really must explain,
for I find reasons for hatred there, as well as subjects of love!”
We have not yet focused on your thoughts, said Tiên,
and we do not know the reasons that make people hate or love.”
“We should hate futile things, said the innkeeper,
hate them cruelly, hate them from the bottom of our hearts,
as Kiệt et Trụ were hated, those debauched [monarchs]
who let the people sink into an abyss of unhappiness;
as U and Lệ were hated, those dissembling and capricious tyrants,
who needlessly put the people through a long stretch of terrible misery;
as the Ngũ Bá” were hated, troublemakers and rabble rousers,
friends of deceit and scourges of the people;
as the Thúc Quí were hated, who, hatching sterile plots,
now subjugated, now giving battle, were the torment of their subjects!
We should [on the other hand] love as people loved the Holy Man
or the learned Nhan Tử, victim of his sad fate,
who, at thirty-one, had to quit hs glorious career;
as Gia Các was loved, that man of superior talent
who, as the Hán neared the end of their reign, resolved to put down the factions;
as the learned Đổng Tử was loved,
who, despite his good intentions, obtained no office,
as the unfortunate Nguyên Lượng was loved,
who, disappointed in his zeal to serve the State, had to return to the plow;
as the unhappy Hàn Dũ was loved,
who offered his opinions to the king in the morning and departed in the evening to faraway exile;
as, lastly, the wise men of Liêm and Lạc were loved,
who, dismissed by order of the prince, returned home and enlightened the people.
I have read and reread the Kinh and the Annals,
wherein I find subjects of hatred and of love in equal measure”
“There you are, said Trực, a golden Buddha inside a pagoda in ruins!
Who'd have thought to find so much erudition buried away in an inn?
Since you love the people, why not secure a position for yourself
to succor them like rain in the searing heat of summer?”
“In days of yore, said the innkeeper, Nghiêu and Thuấn
could not prevail upon Sảo Phủ or force Hứa Do",
Di and Tế would not deign to serve under the Châu dynasty.
Alone, each on his mountain, they served no one'.
Y and Phó concealed their talent.
The one stuck to his plow, the other to his pickaxe, they had neither curiosity nor ambition.
In the old days, Thái Công, armed with a fishing-line,
would divert himself in the morning on the banks of the River Vị,
Did Nghiêm Lăng join the struggles of the world
Trần Đoàn cared not for glory.
Free under the sky, carrying a beggar's bag, he deemed honors and distinctions a vain dream.
How are men today any different from those of yore?
Who will forbid me a life in seclusion? Who will keep me from entering the world of men?”
“This prattling old innkeeper! said Hâm.
With all his great experience, he is, after all, but a lowly innkeeper!
Those who sleep on straw should stick to straw!
When you lie that low, how can you rise any higher?”
Replied the innkeeper: “When the downpour comes,
a frog at the bottom ofa well sees precious little of the sky,
but when the waters are clear, the fish swim freely!
Look at their two eyes, they shine like pearls!
and pourwater on a duck's head! When I think about it, I am dying to laugh!"
“Mr. Innkeeper, don't laugh, said Tiên,
[for] you surely recall the seven men [called] Trước Lâm.
“They had all made friends together and were all one at heart.
Now playing chess, now drinking, plucking the cầm today, writing poetry tomorrow,
they shrugged off glory and riches!
All that wasn't worth the freedom they found in heartfelt joy!
“You have grasped my meaning! said the innkeeper.
Enough on this head! I give you this liquor for the competition prize!
Kiệm and Hâm were of the envious sort who gauge the works of others.
Seeing Tiền so learned, they felt disquiet welling up in their hearts.
Surely Tiên would rank frst in the competition;
as for Hâm, if admitted, his success would be meager at best!
Whilst still deliberating,
Some were carrying their box, some their case of books, the road was thronged.
In groups of seven, in bands of three, the students mingled noisily.
Hardly had Vân Tiên set forth
when he suddenly came upon a messenger from his family bearing a letter for him.
His eyes are awash with tears;
“Heavens above, he cries out, why close the road to renown for me thus?
The boy pours out his lamentations:
“Heavens above! he wails, can you forsakke a learned and true-hearted man?”
“Seeing as it has come to this pitch of misfortune, says Trực,
you must calm down, litte servant, and let up on your sorrow!
See to the requisite remedies morning, noon and night, take care of your master!
Wait for us [here] for the few days of our absence, then we'll confer.
Make haste, for the time being, and go ñnd a tailor
to prepare the mourning dress, so that everything will be ready today!
Straw rope, white hat, funeral robe,
everything according to the rites of Văn Công”
“My mother was up North, cries Tiên, and her son down South!
We were separated by waters and mountains, a huge expanse! I bear the punishment for infringing the rules (of filial piety]!
[Alas] I have neither wings nor fins!
How am I to make it such a long way away?
Át the very moment I'm to take the exam, suddenly I meet with grief!
If I stay, what shall I do? If go, my hopes will be dashed.
Stars change place, objects change state, what have I left to hope for?”
Two streams of tears flow down his face;
the more he considers his misfortune, the more he suffers in his heart.
Does a sail care which way the wind blows?
With emotion he calls to memory the thousand pains his mother took during his childhood.
She gave him her milk for three years, who could describe how tenderly?
“O heavens! O earth! cries the innkeeper, what an unexpected misfortune!
All of a sudden, the storm has suddenly broken the branches of the agarwoodtree!
Who would not be moved to pity at sụch a spectacle?
He was unable to do his flial duty and [yet] he sees his future ruined!
Even if he had at his service the cunning of demons, the power of spirits,
every man would have to undergo these ordeals, mankind's sad privilege!
O what a bitter joke played on us
by those who made 'talenU rhyme with 'woe'!
The way is long, you will have to walk for over a month,
wading through reedy wetlands and crisscrossing willow banks!
At that moment the companions were just leaving [the inn].
Trực, Hâm and Kiệm gave their friend guidance.
O my brother!, said Hâm, do not give yourself up to sorrow!
Clouds of woe are banking up over your head, alas! You are truly wretched!”
Vân Tiên heaves his bundle onto his shoulder and leaves.
Trịnh Hâm watches him go, and tears stream from his eyes.
Hardly had Tiên walked one mile
when the innkeeper came running up to join him.
“I hold you in high regard, he said, O young hero!
I bring you three pills that will keep you alive.
If your bad luck should lead you to a critical pass,
and you should be racked with hunger, this magic remedy will assuage it.”
“I humbly give you thanks, Tiên replied.
My poor heart is perplexed and careworn!”
“I, too, am beset by sadness!, said the innkeeper.
Seeing the way things are, I fled the world and came all the way here.
Walking merrily amid verdant mountains and clear streams,
I went my way to quiet, peaceful spots.
I live far from honors and riches, sheltered from praise and censure!"
Having spoken thus, he promptly withdraws.
Vân Tiên looks at him and a swelling doubt seeps into his heart.
He leaves and, without hesitating, continues on his way back.
The more he turns it over in his mind, the more troubled in mind he becomes.
What does success or failure matter to him?
What troubles him is the travails his birth and education caused his parents, he wanted to requite those kindnesses!
He most definitely deserves to be accused of failing, in his flial piety!
He turns it over in his mind and blushes at being a thankless son!
He constantly strove to keep a pure and sincere heart
and was resolved to settle this sacred debt!
Who'd have thought he was about to be swept away by the current of the waters like a flower,
and that thankless fate held such deprivation in store for him?
There he is, all by himself, undecided halfvay through his journey,
like a lost swallow chirping sadly, far away [from its companions]!
Misfortune has struck, now he perceives it quite clearly!
He understands why his Master said the competition was still far away for him!
His little servant, seeing him in such a state, addresses him in these terms:
“Think, O Master, that it is a long way from here to our native lands!
The trek wearies you, and your tears flow more and more plentifully!
I fear that, halfway there, ilÌness might overcome you!
What is there to do in these mountains? What is there to đecide in these forests?”
“My insides are wrung dry!, says Tiên.
Alas! Sadness has clouded my eyes!
All is dark around me! I cannot see a thing anymore!
My feet are weary of walking, I am racked with pain!
When one possesses a body, one must suffer with it,
but O my body! Do you know all the blows I have been struck?”
“Heaven and earth! You know! cries the little servant.
My Master has been walking only a few days, and he's already ailing!
We're alone herel Whether I look forwards, whether I look back,
all I see is verdant roadsides, grass, trees without end!
No sign of a single village, not even a hamlet!
Try [O my Master!] to drag yourself up yonder, we'll look for a physician!”
Just then they met a stranger crossing the road.
Overcome with compassion, he showed them the way to the village of Đồng Văn.
They walked holding hands and, having made inquiries,
found a physician, whose name was Triệu Ngang.
“Rest for a while, he said to them.
Tomorrow, at daybreak, I shall check the pulse, prepare the remedies, and all shall be well!
Once they have met me, the ailing are sure to recover!
But how much money do you have left in your purse?”
“We have little money! replied the little servant.
But please think hard so as to compose your remedies wisely.
If, fortunately, the ailment is cured,
we have five ounces of silver left, we will give them to you, O Master!”
Ngang says: “I remain in this place,
where three generations of doctors have dwelt!
I have all the books in my possession!
I have the Nội kinh at hand and, even more efficacious, the Ngoại khoa!
After having first examined the Y học,
I shall consult the Thọ thế, then the Đông y,
I shall meditate upon the Ngân hãi tinh vi
and the Cang mục,which is in no wise inferior to the Thanh nang.
I shall meditate upon the Tập nghiệm lương phang
and the Ngự toãn, I shall peruse the Hồi xuân.
I have here, close at hand, first-and sencond-rate medicines.
I prepare my remedies with consummate still,
and as for the pulse, I have studied the principles set forth in the book Lư sơn.
Let me lay hands on the ailment and I shall promtly discern the waus that lead to life or to death!
I have the positions called Lục quân and Tứ vật,
I have Thập toàn and Bát vị, I have at my disposal the book on internal diseases.
Moreover, I know the Bát trận tân phương!
If I come upon an exterior ailment, I prepare some Ngủ sài position."
"You truly have talent! Says the young servant.
Please take the [patient's] pulse and see what mus be prescribed."
"There is weakness in each of the six divisions, says Ngang.
"[Except, however] the left-side quan, whose beating is unsteady and strong.
It is in the Kinh lạc that we shall find a thorough explanation
The fire inside has risen the the head,
and the three digestive organs have long been suffering from an accumulaion of heat/
To diminish this fire, one must combine refreshing curatives,
I shall double the dose, and the burning inside shall subside,
For the outside, I shall make instillations of vạn minh!;
for the insides, I'll have him take hườn tình? and all shall be well!
It's a good thing you Ve given me two ounces of good silver
so I can buy additional medicinals to form the fnal ingredients of the potion.
As I act solely to render you service,
there is no point in requesting a wager!"
The young servant, convinced of the [doctor's] expertise,
Ten days go by and no improvement can be seen!
The patientS physical pain increases, as though his entrails were being scraped!
O Master, come and see! says the young servant,
the pain is not subsiding and still you ask for more silver!”
“Last night, replies Ngang, I was lying stretched out on my bed
when the Father of Medicine sent me counsel in a dream.
The spirits are up there, above our heads!
I fear that you have offended them somehow on the way here.... Who knows?
The best course of action, young servant, would be to cross the bridge
and seek out the soothsayer who dwells at the entrance to the village of Tây Viên”
At these words, the boy takes off,
asks for the soothsayer, makes his offering to him and consults him.
Do you think me one of those vulgar soothsayers
I have lingered long over the Châu diệc,
the sixty-four quẻ are familiar to me, as well as over three hundred hào.
I know inside and out the Huình kim and Giá hạc, books of great import!
Nothing in the successive cycles of history is hiđden from me,
I have the cycles of ten and of twelve at my fingertips!
My knowledge plumbs heavens and earth, as well as the affairs of men!
Lay down here a string of coins, a tiền, forty pieces of silver!,
a platter of betel, a cool glass of spirits, and all shall be made right.
study the [patient's] name and age, as well as the accident that befell him on the way here.
I shall be able to cast his horoscope and know all things clearly!"
“The patient hails from the East, says the young servant.
He was walking, engaging in trade, when he fell ill on the road.
He is a child of the Lục family,
still of a tender age, hardly sixteen years old”
“This is Đinh mão, the Year of the Cat! says the soothsayer.
Henee the trouble looming on the day of Giáp tí.
“The [patient's] destiny is to be found in the Càn box,
his age is that of wealth and glory in this world.
Let us take up the pieces of silver, throw them and see what they say!
...One giao, two sách, three trùng!
This is the quẻ of the Trang thành, one of the six opposites!
I see the parents' hào, in opposition to that of the descendants,
producing the quẻ of the wandering soul,
and, by diabolical action, muddling the paths that lead to honors.
Let us continue deducing the consequences of this quẻ!
This year [your Master] is grieving the death of his mother.
This is what has caused the sudden onset of illness in him,
for the demons of the road are formidable!
If you want his ailment to heal,
you must inquire after a sorcerer to subject him, for several days, to his incantations.
“Where does he dwell?” asks the child.
“In this very place, replies the soothsayer, just a few steps from here!
He is an adept sorcerer, reputed far and wide!
His name is Đạo Sĩ, and he lives in the market town of Trà Hương”
The young servant runs off in haste,
They direct him to the sorcerer's house not far from there.
The boy sets forth and reaches it instantly.
Đạo Sĩ's heart is overjoyed at the sight of him!
“Even I have heard tell of your renown, O Master! says the young servant.
“My Ấn conjuring is powerful, replies the sorcerer,
and who can ever compare to me in the composition of talismans?
When I cross a river, the fsh folds its fins at the sight of me;
when I enter the forest, the tiger escorts me, after prostrating tself before me.
I know how to whip up the wind, I know how to call up the rain,
to send birds afar, to command the vượn monkey, to chase the donkey or lay low the water buffalo.
With a spell uttered by my mouth
I can conjure all creatures into the hổ linh flaskt.
By sowing beans, I can form an army of soldiers,
and fashion a manikin into a general capable of đestroying hell itself.
I sit on the [blades of] sabers and, standing on the tip of a spear, rescue the innocent unjustly condemned.
You must give me three ounces of silver,
in order for me to prepare everything needful to conjure the disease.”
“I will spare no expense, replies the young servant,
I set aside two ounces of silver for necessities along the way.
If you cure this ilness through your spells,
I shall go and fetch the money for you, O Master!”
Go get it, says the wizard, and give it to me right away.
so I can take the measures necessary and prepare everything for the cure.”
“I shall make sure not to forget, replies the young servant,
but I am greatly distressed by the patient suffering, unremittingly at home.
“Wherein lies the dificulty? asks the wizard.
Lie down on the ground, I shall conjure, then I'll give you the talisman to take with you.”
“I am but his little servant, says the boy.
I am not ill, why order me then to submit to your conjurations?”
“I know how to transmit my powers [to others], replies the sorcerer.
To treat, up North, a patient down South, that is the true talent!”
The young servant lets himself be persuaded,
and delightedly lies down to submit to the [sorcerer] conjurings.
invites Bản Cổ to sit down before him as an unimpeachable witness.
He enjoins Đại thánh tề thiên,
and Queen Võ Hậu to appear at once,
and Nguyên soái chỉnh Tày
as well as Phíu Mẫu” to join them!
He prays to the great A Di Buddha,
“Princess of the five dragons! he cries,
and you, the five Hổ of Bình man! Gather together, pitch your camp heret
“Thousands of chiefs, thousands of armies,
infernal divinities of Động đình and Xích lân",
demons of every place in the world,
“hen the sorcerer gives the boy three celestial talismans.
Upon swallowing them, his master will recover his health, affirms the wizard, his recovery is assured.
The young servant, ever biddable,
takes the amulets and returns home to prepare the remedy.
He enters the house and says to the doctor Ngang:
“If there is any silver left in your bag, replies Ngang,
“I am still here, says the young servant,
and i the patient recovers I am prepared to sell myself to you.”
Triệu Ngang, understanding that he has nothing left,
employs hurtful words to drive him away.
“If you stay here, he says, the villagers will lookk askance.
I fear that in the event ofa new misfortune, you will find no succor here."
“The purse is empty! cries the young servant.
A victim of my own trustfulness,  lent an ear [to lies] and I was swindled!
In my frefulness [have spent a hundred strings of coins!
My body is dried out, my entrails shriveled up!
Alack, alas! The money is all gone, the malady still persists,
and here we are, wandering on foreign soil, exposed to the direst dangers!
Let us go! Let us go! [O my Master!] Do your utmost to get out of here
so that I can provide for our subsistence by begging!”
Who can telÌ the pain that has overcome Vân Tiên?
The young servant leads him by the hand; they cross the Lá Buôn Bridget.
Under rains that fall relentlessly,
alas! they are wretched, wretched is nature around them!
How many tỉmes they have suffered bad weather'!
the sky for their blanket, the earth for their bedding, as, exhatsted, they traverse this vast expanse!
As lofty as Vân Tiên's talent may be,
how can he ward off the blows of misfortune?
Wandering, lost, an unknown guest in this land,
“Weariness has broken my limbs! he says.
Let us find some trees, a bush where I can rest my feet!"
“In a moment, says the young servant, we will be out of the woods.
I shall look for an inn, and we shal stop there to relieve our fatigue”
“The sun was disappearing behind the western mountains
when master and servant, one guiding the other, arrived at Đại Đề,
at the very moment that a group of scholars, returning from the competition, were just arriving too.
Trịnh Hâm spotted Vân Tiên and came up to question him.
“It has been two years, he said, since you [left us to] return to your family!
How comes it that we now find you lying ill in this place?"
“As for me, said Tiên, fortune is against me!
“Tử Trực, replied Hâm, came in frst,
my friend Kiểm and I are among the bachelors.
I went ahead, on my way back, to pay a visit to my family;
When two men meet and one of them is struck down by adversity,
can the one in good health desert the one afilicted?
To go from here to Đồng Thành,
how can you walk, now that you have fallen ill?
Drag yourself along to Giang Trong,
well find a boat there and sail together”
“The ties of friendship between us, said Tiên, must perforce breed obligations.
“Have a seat here for a few moments! replied Hâm.
As for you, young servant, frst come with me!
Let us enter the forest to seek some precious remedy there
to ward off any unforeseen accidents that might occur on the river, at sea or in a storm
The young servant sets off in haste.
What does his fatigue matter to him, desirous, as he is, of success?
Trịnh Hâm, feeling the dagger of envy in his heart,
seizes the boy and ties him to a tree.
“May you first be devoured by the tiger! [he cries].
This is a trick I have devised to make Tiên perish. Now I am sure to succeed!”
Vân Tiên is still seated, waiting impatiently.
Trịnh Hâm comes back and tells him a tiger has devoured his young servant!
Vân Tiên sighs, sheds tears and, prostrating himself, writhes on the ground.
“How come all misfortunes suddenly strike me? he cries,
Till this day, wandering alone and stray on foreign soil,
master and servant were shored up by each other!
And now they are sundered!
Who will see to my needs? Who will watch over me from now on?”
“Brother, says Hâm, dontt lose heart!
Let me take you to Đông Thành, then all will be well!
Who can count the tears shed by Lục Vân Tiên?
A fair wind in the sail bears him swiftly along with the current.
Tied to the tree, the young servant could not come back.
The clamor o£his calls dies away in the deserted forest.
“What does it matter to me, he says, if I perish?
[But] Tam moved to compassion in thinking of the heir of the Lục family, wandering on dark shores,
facing countless vicissitudes brought on by his uncertain fate!
Is he crossing a river? Roaming through the underbrush?
O Vân Tiên! If now your soul has Supernatural powers,
lead me forth to serve you?!”
After this invocation, his eyes shed a flood of tears.
It s late at night. Seated against the pine trunk, the young servant falls asleep.
The King of the mountain draws near,
The young servant awakes, his eyes still heavy,
and looks around. The sight of the tracks the tiger left in the earth apprises him of what has happened!
Suspended between joy and fear,
he runs to the places he left, searching for his master Vân Tiên.
The sun comes up just above the rooftops of the houses.
The boisterous throng of merchants is heading towards the Phiên market.
Accosting a woman innkeeper in the middle of the road, the young servant
asks her: “Did you not see a man in mourning yesterday?”
“That man, alas! is but a spirit nowl she replies.
This very morning the vilÌagers went off to bury him”
At these words, the boy is stricken with terror!
With his hand he wipes off the tears that blur his sight,
when, all ofa sudden, he hears loud voices on the edge of the forest,
The young servant rushes over,
“Who is this boy coming hither?” ask the villagers.
“It is a servant, he says, looking for his masster.
Tell me: who is the dead man buried in this grave!”
“A young man, they answer.
We know not whence he came, his wandering steps led him here,
Ah! but how comely of body and face he was!
Whatever the ailment that reduced him to this state, he deserves our sympathy!”
The young servant, unable to inquire further,
throws himself to the ground and, writhing by the tomb, begins to weep and moan.
They all look upon him and are overcome with compassion!
They call out to one another, take up their pickaxes and move away.
He builds himselfa hụt to guard the tomb; his resolve is quite firm!
Alone in the land of Đại Đề,
he will go begging in the morning, reciting verses; in the evening he wil offerings to the deceased.
Determined to repay his debt of gratitude to the one who clothed and fed him,
the servant will be reputed loyal in his lifetime, his name redolent with virtue after his death!
But now it is time to return to Vân Tiên.
Leaning all night on the planking of the boat, he sighs, he groans.
His handkerchief is drenched with his tears.
He laments the fate of his servant, struck by unmerited calamity!
In this skiff lost in the middle of the East Sea,
It is late at night, the sea is calm, smooth as a mirror.
The stars appear here and there, a mist spreads its dark veil.
It is at this moment that Trịnh Hâm puts his hand [to his iniquitous deed],
and pushes Vân Tiên into the deep!
Trịnh Hâm, ìn adissembling voice, cries out to the heavens,
wakes the crew and speaks in such manner as to divert suspicion.
Everyone on the boat heaves a sigh;
everyone, heavy of heart, bemoans the misfortune of the heir to the Lực.
Vân Tiên has fallen in the middle of the current,
but lo and behold a Dao dragon comes to his rescue and brings him to the riverbank!
Fortunately, the sun has just come out in the sky.
A fisherman with a net catches sight of the young man, promptly pulls him out of the water and carries him ashore.
Commanding [his son] to make haste and build a fire around the drowned man,
he dries his clothes, and his wife warms him up.
As soon as the heat seeps into Vân Tiên limbs,
he comes to, his soul troubled, his body quivering, like a man after a drinking bout.
He thought himself doomed to perish submerged by the waves,
and now finds himself - who'd have thought it? - in the world of the living!
The fisherman then questions him,
and Vân Tiên tells him his story in every detail.
“Stay with us! says the fisherman.
“How would you be able to feed me? replies Tiên.
Here I am, weak, like a ripe fruit on the tree [to which it is attached]!
Borne on the waters of the river, I washed up hereby luck.
I have no way to requite your kindness, I am alone and devoid of resources!”
“My heart, that of an old man, is not greedy! responds the fisherman.
Inclined to do good, I expect no reward!
my heart insensible to enticements of profit and fame!
By day, the wind refreshes me; by night, I enjoy the moonlight.
Free in my solitude, I provide for my subsistence.
Humming my song, sometimes I fish in the ponds, sometimes I visit my fishpond.
Who in all the world knows the joys of my solitude?
I hold all the great teachings of the Kinh luân in my hands?
Possessing but a single bamboo boat in this world,
on the vast Hàn Giang River I take my bath in the rain and the wind untangles my hair.”
The name Hàn Giang jogs Vân Tiên's memory.
“Võ Công, he asks, does he not dwell near here?”.
“We are neighbors, says the fisherman.
To get there we need only go through three bends in the river.”
“At one time, resumes Tiên, our families gave their word,
bound by plans of marriage. Could he have changed his feelings and show no more affection?
Spouses must share in both happiness and adversity!
The best thing for me to do is to proceed thither and seek refuge there.
If one wants to keep the bonds of conjugal affection intact a whole life long,
one must not desert each other when the wind of ill fortune blows!
You have saved my life, that is a tremendous kindness!
I beg you to crown that act by guiding my steps thither.”
“Performing the role of son-in-law, says the fisherman,
is as painstaking as threading a needle!
I fear that in its flight the bird may have lost its strength
and, after having roamed through unknown parts, it cannot find the tree where it once perched!
I fear that, having walked slowly, you might arrive too late!
Do not be misled by the river you once navigated or the bank where you once disembarlced!
How many possess goodness of heart?
When the sun is blazing, one quickly dons one's hat; against the rain falling throws on a coat of leaves!
How many, considering what comes to pass on earth,
remember the poor and disregard the rich and noble'?
But Vân Tiên begs and pleads with him,
the fsherman is compelled to set sailand convey him [to Võ Công].
Taking Tiên by the hand, he leads him into the foyer.
Võ Công sees hìm, and the more he looks at him, the more he blushes!
He fears only one thing, which is to belaughed at,
so he tries hard to ñnd words of. greeting for his friend of yore,
“Fisherman” he says, “by bringing Tiên here you have earned our gratitude,
later on we shall consider how to reward this service!"
The fisherman replies: “My heart of an old man cares little for that!
I recall that once, on Mount Lư sơn,
the fisherman Ngư Phủ made Ngủ Viên" cross the river.
Later on Đình Trưởng had his boat moored
From antiquity, man has had compassion for unfortunates;
the fisherman takes his leave and climbs back onto his boat.
Võ Công's heart cannot shake off its discomfiture.
“Have a seat here! he says to Tiên,
whilst I retire to decide what is to be done!
O my dear Quỳnh Trang! he says,
sound out the heart of Thể Loan, our beloved girl, see what she desires!
Both of you decide what stance to take!
Naturally, I do not compel my wife, why compel my child?”
Loan answers thus: “A heel red as vermilion,
who has ever agreed to drive it into the mud?
Who would combine in the same vase, the water lily and the base morning glory?
Who has ever mixed lemon and starfruit with pomegranate and pear?
I, a distinguished maiden, would rather never marry
than put my lot in the hands ofa commoner!
but is a blind man like this one a suitable son-in-law?
I hear tell that in this competition,
Vương Tử Trực came in first.
If we wish to commence Imarriage negotiations,
let us, the two houses of Vương and Võ, Compose a single family and form a distinguished alliance.”
“If we want to bring our affairs to a successful conclusion, says Công,
We need to come up with an expedient to sever the old ties for good.
I have heard tell that beneath Green Pines Mountain
lies a very deep, sealed cave, from which it is hard to find a way out.
Đông Thành is still a thousand miles away.
If I take the young man there and leave him there, who will ever know?”
The moon has now reached the apex of its orbit.
Vân Tiên, seated in the covered gallery, sighs.
Võ Công appears and artfully persuades him
to come down into the boat; his servants, he says, will take him to Đông Thành.
They leave at the third watch;
Vân Tiên is led to the dark cave and left there for good!
That done, [the servants] sneak away at once,
board the boat, take to the oars and row vigorously out to sea.
Tiên cries out: “O my guides!
Take me, I beg you, to my native land! I ask nothing else of you.
Gratitude for this service will remain deeply engraved on my heart,
and your momentary pains will never be forgotten!”
All remains silent, not a single voice is heard anymoret
At this instant, Vân Tiên is seized with terror.
He reflects and, realizing at last that Võ Công has plotted his ruin,
laughs bitterly to himself at the deceitful games of fortune.
“The planned marriage has replaced another; [old] affections have been shattered!
He broods over the extent of his woes.
Hardly has he been rescued from the sea, and now here he is, [captive] in a cave!
He has managed to entangle himself ever and again in the ties of adversity
and escaped a net only to fall into a trap!
Entombed as he is in this lonely cave,
where is he to find a guide to lead him out?
The heavens have đeftly devised this expiation!
Alack! Alas! He is lostt What shall he do?
He's done for! Here he is, cut off from the human race!
He lies against the flat of a rock, withdrawn into himself.
The wind on this winter night rushes underground,
a fine mist seeps into the cave, with a scattering of freezing rain!
he finds in his three pills a constant soothing of his suffering.
Du thần sees him and is moved to compassion.
He scrutinizes the young man and, noticing the talisman he is wearing,
As certain that Lục Vân Tiên is before him.
Taking him [then] by the hand, the spirit leads him out [of the cave].
After walking about a mile,
they arrive at Đại Lộc; daylight breaks in the East.
Du thần returns to the mountain,
Vân Tiên remains sunk in a deep sleep.
That very morning, an old woodcutter, carrying his roll of rice for the day
and his axe on his shoulder, was crossing the forest.
Arriving at the road to Đại Lộc, which is his destination,
“Maybe it's an evil demon, he thinks,
Vân Tiên hears this voice and feels joy welling up in his soul.
The old woodcutter listens for a long time,
At these words, Vân Tiên recognizes
I trust in your kind and generous heart, he says,
by saving me today you will give me a second life.
Sooner or later, upon my return to Đông Thành,
I love men who are loyal and sincere!
“Hunger torments my insides! says Tiên.
It has been six days now that I have not tasted food,
and that makes my exhausted limbs even weaker!
I would like to follow you, but will I make it all the way there?”
The old woodcutter hastily picks up his coat of leaves,
and, while his hands open his pack of rice, his mouth invites Vân Tiên to partakke thereof.
“Go ahead, he says, at, drink, in peace!
I will do my best to carry you on my back to my abode”
Upon leaving the forest and heading towards a crossroads,
O what good fortune! they happen upon a man, and that man is Hớn Minh!
[While] the old woodcutter makes his way with hurried steps,
Hớn Minh, following him, inquires what is going on.
Vân Tiên, hearing that quite familiar voice,
“May my older brother, says Minh, permit me to question him!
Owing to what events does he find himself in the throes of this distress?”
“What can I tell you? replies Tiên. My miseries are countless!
This poor body resembles a piece of wood borne by the current [of the river],
floating at the mercy of the flood, pushed by the wind and shaken by the waters.
Here today, there tomorrow, there is no end to my misfortunes!”
“This is not a suitable place for posing questions! says Minh.
Let us enter the pagoda, I beg you, we shall confer there together”
I cannot remain idle for long in this place, says the woodcutter.
I go to the forest to fell wood and then sell it at the market in Phiên”
Straight away Hớn Minh bends his knee and bows down before him.
“Thanks to you, he says, my friend Vân Tiên is saved!
Hee are two ounces of silver I was keeping in reserve,
allow me to give ït to you in return for your act of kindness!”
All alone with myself, I am free all day on the mountain.
My heart does not covet the property of others;
Here I have the mountain, there I have water. In full liberty,
in the clear moonlight and refreshed by the wind, I have deer to keep me company!
At these words, Vân Tiên recognizes a loyal heart.
He asks him his name with a view to repaying his kindness someday.
The old woodcutter returns to the mountain forests,
Tiên and Minh proceed to the pagoda.
Tiên says: “Today I have had a happy meeting!
But how come you are in this place, what brings you here, oh my very dear friend?”
Minh replies: “Not long ago I intended to go to the competition
and met you in the Võ miễu shrine as you were on your way there too.
and I, shouldering my bundle, I went ahead, without hurrying, to the capital.
Hardly had I reached the phủ of Ô Minh,
when I met the deputy prefect's son, Đặng Sanh was his name.
He met a beautiful maiden, and the libertine slighted her!.
I was at once afire with anger,
I threw him roughly to the ground and broke his leg!
I did that deed, so I had to take the punishment, no two ways about it!
I gave myselfin, admitting my guilt, and they brought me before the district court.
Condemned to exile in the land of Sóc Phương,
I escaped from my prison and, seeking my way, arrived here,
Fortunately,  happened upon this pagoda,
where, unbeknownst to all, I have dwelt to this day.”
At this account, Vân Tiên is overcome with keen compassion
Hớn Minh is deepÌy moved in hs heart by the details of which he is apprised,
and tears fall drop by drop from his eyes as from a tilted vase.
They see the years of their old age passing by in sorrow and grief,
waiting for their son like parched earth waiting for abundant rain!
They do not know where this poor body, swept away by the current, has been washed up.
I have failed thriee, it is but all too certain, in my filial piety,
and my young servant has suffered an undeserved demise because of me!
“Here on earth, replies Minh,
man is Sometimes rich and happy, sometimes poor and wretched.
It is in the alternatives of abasement and grandeur that we know what he is worth,
and the hotter the furnace, the more brightly gold shines therein.
But that is enough. Do not hasten, friend, to return to your family!
Stay here, look to heal your ailment!
When the time of misfortune has passed,
we shall go together to establish our reputation.
but Khương Tử, though late in the day, had a whole life of glory!
Success and failure are settled in advance by the Heavens.
Vân Tiên then feels his heart at peace,
and remains in the pagoda in Hớn Minh's company.
Võ Công, in his treachery,
Had dropped the planned alliance with the Lụcs for one with the Vươngs.
Since the day he had made an attempt on Tiên life in the cave,
Thể Loan was radiant, her heart surrendering more and more to merriment.
She made herself up, painting her face everyday
in anticipation of some encounter, striking elegant attitudes, whether standing or seated.
Now it happened that Tử Trực, having just returned,
stopped in at the Võs to ask after Vân Tiên!
Illness overcome him and, at present, he roams the banks of the Yellow Springs!
I bemoan the sad fate that has befallen that young man in this world!
It is because Nguyệt Lão twvisted the red thread poorly for him!”
At these words, Tử Trực's heart sank,
and tears rained down from his eyes.
“I am cut to the quick, he said with a sigh, at the memory of the companion who is no longer!
We had made friends, but we had not yet had a chance to prove all our affection!
Why, O heavens! have you forsaken this learned scholar, this good man?
He had not yet been able to have his name inscribed on the tablets [of the competition] and his life was cut short in its prime!
Our friendship had not yet reached its peak,
and already he is dead! Why have I survived him?
Are there [then] in this world that many souls who understand each other,
that many friends of the same age and doctrine, that many men with the same heart?”
“I, too, secretly lament [his loss]! said Công.
I weep for my child broken union, for these two lives destined for each other, and [forever] sundered!
But enough, believe me! Enough moaning and groaning!
In my mind I have hit upon an excellent sneans [of redressing this woe].
Since you have come to these parts, stay here,
and start a new family with my daughter
so that when you enter [the bridal chamber] and when you leave in the morning,
it will seem to us, in seeing Vương Tử Trực, that we are seeing Vân Tiên!”
replied Trực, we swore to each other to be brothers!
Tiên wife is Trực's sister-in-law,
how could a brother dare to breach the duties of friendship by wedding his brothers wife?
I know not what books you have studied,
but you utter words that are strange and unseemly!
Did you learn the customs of the realm of Tề,
where Tử Củ's wife married Hoàng Công?
Or those of the palace of the Đường,
where Tiệu Lạc's wife became Thế Dân's?
Do the men of our day and age have the customs of the Tần,
How can you speak like this without blushing?
Võ Công, overcome with unspeakable confusion,
“Then Thể Loan steps through the draperies [of her chambers],
her mouth greets the new bachelor returning from the examination.
“I could not keep my sworn word to the end!; she says.
With my hopes dashed, l cannot arrange a husband's box [of books] and present him with the turban!
Alas! My heart, which cherished this intention, has, like a hare,
waited for the moon to shine for many an autumn night!
If you disagree, at least keep silent!
“Am I then a Lữ Phụng Tiên, says Trực
and you Điêu Thuyền, baiting me with your passionate airs?
The grass has only just grown on your husband's grave,
and you have the heart to blurt out words of love?
O shame! And yet you are a member of the human race!
In what way do you then differ from a beast?
O Vân Tiên, O my brother! Friend who understood my soul!
On the dark banks where you dwell, are vou apprised of all this?”
Wilh his hand he wipes of histears, then departs.
He hastens to make preparations to go to Đông Thành.
Võ Công heart was full of shame;
after a five-day illness, his consciousness forsook him and he died wretchedly'.
Thể Loan and her old mother Quỳnh Trang
closed their door and remained immersed in grief inside their abode.
Now it is time to speak of Nguyệt Nga.
In Hà Khê prefecture, near her father, she gave herself up wholly to her studies.
Kiếu Công, promoted to the title of governor,
was by royal edict put in charge of ruling the district of Đông Thành.
He issued a proclamation far and wide insistently demanding
The latter obeyed and appeared at the palace.
When Kiểu Công asked him for news of Vân Tiên,
the old man, remembering his son, began to weep and moan.
“Rumor has it, he said,
that my child felill and [his soul], forsaking its body, left him lying in the road!
Since then I have had no news of him,
Kiểu Công, in the throes ofa cruel uncertainty,
went back inside his palace and conveyed to Nguyệt Nga these words.
O my father, please send for him to come hither!"
Nguyệt Nga is standing in her chamber, leaning against the wall,
clasping the portrait [of Vân Tiên] in her arms, and from her eyes rain tears.
“Whereis the object of this old love [now]? says Công.
O my dear daughter, present [this picture] to the eyes of Lục!"
The old man sits down and beholds it a while.
whereupon Lực is abreast of everything.
Oh! how much he bemoans his child's cruel fate!
Who can tell the sorrow that overthelms Nguyệt Nga?
In this world, he says, man resembles the shadow of a mayfly;
“We gave each other a solemn oath! says the maiden.
Prompdly bringing forth gold and silver, he offers it to Lục as a token of his gratitude.
Old Lục refuses [the gift], thanks him and asks permission to retire.
“How could I dare accept a gift? He says. And on what grounds [would I]?
I believed my son [utterly] lost to me;
who would have told me that his features remained fixed in this likeness?
Now that I can see my child here,
my heart will keep a sweet memory of him, an indelible memory!
O wide Earth! O lofty Heavens! Lend an ear to my groans!
What more can I say?”
Old Lục takes his leave and moves off, Kiều Công has his servants escort him.
Nguyệt Nga has fallen ill, lamenting,
To this day she has suffered from waiting!
It would have been better for her had they never met!
“We were acquainted quite briefly, she says.
One of us is still here, and the other, O heavens!, has perished!
When I loved that eminent man, did I know when [his star] would wane?
In letters, in the art of war, who would dare compare himself to him?
I weep because, having đevoted himself to unrelenting studies, his toil was sterile! What glory has he reaped from it
In this world, man is like unto a mayfly: he toils, he strives, to no avail!
I weep because he did not have time to gain fame!
His grand deeds were obliterated in advance; just as a wreck washed away by the current vanishes, so his
reputation has wilted like a flower!
I weep for our thwarted marriage!
Who in future will watch over the sticks of incense and the cup of water?
Through all five watches of the night, my tears flow unceasing!
At the sight of the portrait I here behold, I feel my heart being rent.
in the world of the dead will we at least be reunited?”
Kiều Công rises and leaves [his chambers],
his heart sinks at hearing his daughter wail.
“O my child! he says, do not give yourself up to despair!
This misfortune is due to the unforeseen play of the secrets of destiny!”
“Who can describe my grieft rejoins the maiden.
Out of the blue, I saw my yoke break in midstride!
Since the male and female phoenix are now parted,
lying prostrate alone on my bed, on my lonely pillow, I accept my lot!
But I swear! Never will my heart, like the heart oÝa commoner,
leaving my husband in the Ngân River, go in search of another on the Lam Bride!
As long as your daughter remains standing under the vault of heaven,
allow her to  devote her life to worshipping this picture, she desires nothing more!”
Kiều Công is far from satisfied.
“If you wish to keep your chastity, he says, what can I say against that?”
A man of noble descent, holding a high office,
and bearing, at the sovereign's court, the erninent title of Thái sư,
heard tell that Kiểu Côngs daughter,
having attained the age of sixteen, had no husband yet,
He sent gifts
Kiều Công, loath to compel his daughter,
sent the presents back to the Thái sư with đue ceremony.
This official, a man devoid of lofty sentiments,
took to nurturing in his heart plans for revenge.
They made incursions all the way to the Đồng Quan passage.
Sở Vương summoned his mandarins of both orders to a council,
“If, he said, to shore up the realm and give the people peace,
The Thái sư, lighting on this chance to have his revenge,
hastily bowed and spoke to the king as follows:
and laid waste to the realm, it is owing to the beauty of our women.
If you want to put a stop to Ô Qua's war,
give them a beautiful maiden, and peace will be made!
Nguyệt Nga, the daughter of Kiều Công,
hardly sixteen years of age, is in the very prime of her beauty,
her truly royal charms would overwhelm whole cities.
She possesses great dignity, moreover, with a refined mind,
Have this maiden brought to the kingdom of Ô Qua,
Sở Vương approved of this proposal
Old Kiểu was promoted to the post of prime minister.
“I have resolved [wrote the king] to place the interests of the State in your hands!
As the young Nguyệt Nga is of age to take a husband,
on the twentieth day of the ninth month you shall sendher to Phiên in tribute; this is the term I have set”
Nguyệt Nga heart suffers a thousand torments!
“The watches of the night wear on, but sleep flees from her eyelids.
and sits leaning against the curtains with her long hair scattered, lost in thought.
“In bygone days, she says to herself, Chiêu Quân was likewise offered in tribute,
sent to Phiên owing to the portrait Diên Thọ had made of her.
“These two maidens had to leave, one of them
compelled by her loyalty to the Prince, the other by her filial love,
Chiêu Quân flung herself into the River Hà;
Hạnh Ngươn threw herself into the Trì Linh pond,
she loved Lương Ngọc and remained faithful to the three duties of a woman!.
“Today, now that I, too, am racked by inimical fortune,
I take a vow to safeguard this portrait to the end of my days!
I must remain faithful to my husband, loyal to my sovereign!
These are two solemn duties!
In remaining faithful to my king, I forget what I owe my husband!
I shall give my body in service to the Prince, and keep my heart for my husband!
Kiều Công was pondering, resting on his pillow.
He hears his daughter groan, and what she says only adds to his sorrow.
He calls her and, making her [sit down] against the curtain of his bed,
he gives her advice and exhorts her to keep her honor intact.
“If this were not an affair of State, [he says],
Would a father consent to assailing his childs inclinations?"
“What does your child matter? replies the maiden.
Why concern yourself with her useless and wretched existence?
It is you I pity, O my father, you who are already advanced in years!
Who will worry about you? Who will give you the care you'll need?
Who will ask about your health in the morning? Who will see to it in the evening?”
Why worry about family matters? says Công.
Calm your heart, O my daughter, to go [in peace] to the State [of Phiên]!
Today is the tenth day of the month,
You must make your preparations to depart on the twentieth.”
“My decision is madel replies the maiden.
All that remains is for me to fulil my duties to the beloved who chose my heart.
Allow your child to go prostrate herself before Lục ông
and to fast for seven days to render unto in Tiên all the honors [she owes him]
so that having fully shown him hey appreciation for the service she received,
she may meet him later when she descends to the banks of the Yellow Springs.”
Having given careful-thought to what should be done,
Kiều Công gives her, along with some gold, an escort Of servants.
[Upon her arrival] old Lục hurries out to come before her.
Nguyệt Nga enters his house and arranges everything for the ceremony.
On the propitious day, at the ngọ hour!, she appears before the shrine;
she fasts and lies down on the ground in honor of Lục Vân Tiên,
then, unrolling the portrait, she hangs it above [the shrine].
“The neighbors are admii all are moved with compassion!
Nguyệt Nga's voice is heard; she weeps, she groans.
O Vân Tiên! O my husband! On the banks of the Yellow Springs, do you know my misfortune?”
When the seven days of íasting had elapsed,
the maiden presented old Lực with a sum of money as a token of her appreciation.
“I was waiting for my husband, but I did not see hưm, she says.
I can have no doubt about it! Though I may be beautiful, I must live unwed!
Since the king is sending me to Phiên today as a concubine,
my heart has resolved to descend to the Yellow Springs to find [your son] there!
Although the wedding did not take place, you may call me daughter-in-Ìaw;
before attending to affairs of State, I must take care of those of our house†
Every day, every step will take me further away [from you],
[so] I leave you this, O my father, to provide for your old agel!"
She prostrates herself all in tears,
then takes leave and moves away, buried in her sad thoughts.
A throng of mandarins, mounted on their carriages, accompany her,
and fifty maidservants are assigned to serve her.
As the twentieth day of the month has come,
the mandarins escorting her lead her straight to the vessel.
Nguyệt Nga hastens to send Kim Liên
to ask her father to board the boat in order to see her pass.
“My heart, Công says to her, is steeped in bitterness!
Do not display your attachment thus lest you redouble my grief!”
“High mountains, replies the maiden, deep waters
will separate us; I shall not see my father again!
My body belongs henceforth to the soil of Ô Qua
and my spirit shall be condemned to wander in those faraway lands!
We are going to part: I shall go north and you remain in the south!
But allow your đaughter to leave you a word of consolation!
When a light breeze blows through the treetops,
it shall be the soul o your child returning to visit her family!"
At these words Kiều Công lets his tears flow,
and the mandarins themselves are moved with compassion.
[But] it is a matter of royal duty.
Father and daughter must henceforth abide far apart from each other;
whilst the mandarin escorts, standing [on the shore], sadly watch it disappear!
After sailing for ten days, they were about to reach the border post.
The vastness of the sea stretched out in the distance, the waves breaking noisily.
The maiden knew not what night it was.
The bright light of the moon made that of the stars pale,
and everything below the vault of the sky was silent and calm.
Nguyệt Nga, thinking about the marriage she had never consummated,
cried out, groaning: “Here are the waters, over there the mountains!
My eyes contemplate the beauties of nature, but where is the man [I love]?”
The whole crew had long been fast asleep.
I want to declare my love here before I die!
Vân Tiên! O my husbandI! Are you aware?
I swear to keep this heart, which is yours, chaste and pure!”
Having said this, groaning, she tookk up the portrait, placed it on her shoulder
and, watching the waves borne away by the tide, hastened to fling herself in!
What horror was Kim Liên at her awakening!
Along with the corps of maidservants, she gave way to trepidation.
Restrained by the same dread, they dared not let their cries be heard,
and cast about for an expedient to avoid divulging this calamity.
“This, they said to one another, is an affair of State!
Were the captain to find out what happened, we'd die a wretched death!
If we want to keep an impenetrable secret,
Kim Liên must take Nguyệt Nga's place.
If, taking the true wife's place, she goes to the kingdom of Ô Qua,
who could uncover the fraud and find out the truth?”
When they had agreed on this secret scheme,
The captain, leading the maiden to the middle of a cavalcade of wheeled carts,
handed her over to the guard of the chief for her to be brought to Phiên.
Who would have thought that Kim Liên the servant
was to become queen in the land of Phiên for the rest of her life?
After Nguyệt Nga had flung herself into the đeep out on the open sea,
The moon had just disappeared behind the treetops,
and the maiden soul maundered still in the realm of Âm cung".
Who can describe the sight of her body lying unheeded on this winter night,
coated with hoarfrost and snow on this frozen shore?
Quan Âm, overcome with compassion for this true-hearted maiden,
took her and laid her in the middle ofa flower garden.
“Young Nguyệt Nga, she said to her,
seek out a pÌace of refuge, let the days go by there!
In two or three years, near this [very] pÌace,
husband and wife shall be reunited!”
Nguyệt Nga soon came to again
and, restored to life, pondered the words she had heard in a dream.
Not yet knowing whether they were true or misleading.
she went off in search of a place where she might take refuge.
Lonely, dogged by gloomy thoughts,
she saw the sky brighten all of a sudden and the sun rise in the east.
She was walking alone, laden with the portrait oF her husband,
when suddenly she caught sight of old Bùi strolling in his garden.
“Where do you live, maiden? he asks.
To what end do you come to my lower garden?”
Yesterday, she says, a gale
sunk my boat and reduced me to this state.
The sky was black, I lost my way and ended up here.
Old Bùi stops and contemplates Nguyệt Nga's face.
If it is not the face oF a nobly-born maiden, her features are at least those of one of a distinguished class.
He asks her to recount all the details of her adventure,
which Nguyệt Nga tells with sincerity.
Delighted, old Bùi guides her to his home
and gives her other clothes; then he keeps her and treats her as his own daughter.
His name is Bài Kiệm; at the moment he is in the capital.
In my house I had no daughter.
Nguyệt Nga found repose in Bùi's abode,
but every night she thought about the difficulties of her situation.
Eirst of all, she worried about the matter of Ô Qua,
trembling at the thought of the king meting out undeserved punishment on her old father.
Her youth and beauty were further cause for concern,
While Nguyệt Nga gave herself up to her apprehensions,
it came time for Bùi Kiệm to return to his father's house.
Having seen the maiden give signs oỀ veneration to the picture of a man,
How come this portrait bears a resemblance to Vân Tiên? he says.
Does it have supernatural powers that you should worship it so?”
“Every woman, replies Nguyệt Nga,
should bear, etched on her heart, the two words rectitude and chastity|
Even if she should live a hundred years, she must always be faithful,
and in life as in death, must have but a single solitary husband!”
“You are mistaken! says Kiệm.
Who, having sold everything, has ever remained seated at market till noon?
Amongst the earth inhabitants,
Out of seventy personages of antiquity, do you see a single one who has done as you have?
Whilst the Queen of Spring' lingers still in the flower garden,
how often does one se the bee buzzing by, the butterfly approaching!
But the Queen has quit this spring garden,
and the flower wilts, the stamens drop; it is nothing now but an untended forest!
Who does hot lay claim to wealth and glory in this world?
A thousand ingots of gold could not buy back three vanished springs!
What good will it do you, like a nun in her pagoda,
to remain cloistered in a cel that is cold all year round behind a forbidden door?
Abandoned to the whims of the waves, the bargue of love
knows not which of the dozen landing stages to make for.
Who has ever worn a dress without a collar,
eaten rice without chopsticks? Chewed betel without slaked lime?
Why not think about all that, maiden!
and [why are you] forever clasping this painting, so long a source of sorrow to you?”
“I once studied the sacred books and the Annals, says Nguyệt Nga,
[Wherein it says that] the utmost duty of a maiden is to remain chaste!
I will not emulate the customs of the kingdom of Trịnh,
where they'd arrange trysts in the mulberry tree gardens to satisfy their passions there.”
“Since you know the books so well, rejoins Kiệm,
why not meditate upon the teachings thereof? Why lie in a lonely bed [at night]?
Once upon a time, Hổ Dương, although she had just lost her husband,
was nonetheless sensible of beauty; Tổng Công Was pleasing to her.
In the morning, she'd show Doản Phủ out, in the evening shed welcome Trần Quân in.
Formerly, in the days of the Hán, dịd Lữ Hậu, in her springtime,
Under the Đường, in days of yore, was it then wrong of Võ Hậu
So you see, according to the books,
a life of pleasure is worth no less than any other life!
We are all inhabitants of the earth;
Although a denizen of this world, you seek not your living counterpart!
It is not right for you to sequester your beauty thus,
emulating Như Ý, who combed the portrait of Vân Quân!"
Nguyệt Nga discerned in Kiệm a man ofcrude sensibilities.
She keptsilent and thought about a way to escape and put a stop to his advances.
[However] old Bùi, in a Syrupy voice, lavished her with compliments
and sought to persuade her to become his son's companion.
You have come to this place, your charms match his;
the moon is serene, the wind fresh; for whom is your boat waiting, moored to its stake?
“When spring is past, it does not come back!" say the books.
Today the rose is in full bloom, tomorrow it may be wilted!
Why do you make yourself the enemy of your beauty,
lying at night on a cold pillow, on a lonely bed?
her spring slipped away, and her beauty faded!
Oh! Stop, believe me! Stop this moaning and groaning!
Join with the old man's son to start a new family under favorable auspices!”
Nguyệt Nga pretends to be overjoyed.
“By offering hospitality to me to this day, you have earned my gratitude!
do not rush anything, this bond will be forged litlle by littlet!
Allow me to prostrate myself before Vân Tiên to take leave of him.
I shall fast for seven days and it will all be over between us!”
At these words, father and son feel their hearts fill with joy.
They fix up the house and arrange everything elegantly against the wedding.
The abode is adorned throughout with floral sedge mats, pleated pillows;
Antique rarities and the eight precious objects are displayed for all to see.
[However,] before the third watch has come,
Nguyệt Nga takes up her paintbrush, writes a brief letter,
pastes it on the white wall,
and leaves at once, shouldering the portrait [of Vân Tiên].
The way is lined with dense shrubbery on either side.
It is late, all is deserted; the moon, at this instant, is veiled by clouds.
The maiden follows random paths unknown to her.
But here are fireflies twinkling in the night, she walks on by the light they shed.
After traversing the thicket, she climbs a hill.
The cricket makes its noisy voice heard, the cicada sadly laments.
Nguyệt Nga treads the rocks in her path underfoot, walking straight ahead.
Suddenly, in the east, the sun comes up in the sky.
Weary after walking for so long already,
the maiden looks for a flat rock on which to rest her legs.
Celestial Buddhas protect sincere hearts!
An old woman is walking through the forest, leaning on her staff.
"If you are Nguyệt Nga, she says,
endeavor to follow me to my home!
Whilst reposing last night, I saw Phật bà appear to me,
and, apprised by the goddess, I have come to this place.”
Nguyệt Nga, torn between doubt and trust,
decides to take the risk and, with her eyes closed, follows the old woman to her house.
Entering, she espies women.
busy weaving cotton and silk fabrics.
Reassured, Nguyệt Nga settles in this place,
henceforth she will cease her wandering hither and thither without refuge!
She asks how many miles must be crossed
from this land of Ô Sào to reach the fortress.
In the present chapter, we shall see Vân Tiên,
at the moment still dwelling in the pagoda, re-enter this world.
In his sÌeep, in the middle of the night, an immortal appears to him
and presents him with a wondrous remedy; his eyesight is suddenly restored.
Since misfortune first took hold of him on a distant road.
to the present moment, nearly six years have elapsed,
His father is now over a century old!
Remembering him, he feels pangs in his heart and tears on his cheeks!
He sets off to return to his land,
and Hớn Minh accompanies him for several miles.
“I'm going to see my native village again, Vân Tiên tells him,
but our mutual friendship will reunite us again; we shall see each other again at the competition!”
“Fortune is against me! says Minh.
Condemned to exile at the time, I fled;
how could I dare appear for the exam?
I resolved to become a monk in this pagoda!”
“If I am fortunate enough to pass the next test, Tiên replies,
I trust I shall find some means of bringing us back together [again]!
For years on end, we lived wretchedly on tương and vegetables,
I loved you in misfortune; could I forget you in prosperity?
After failure comes success!
Preserve your feelings of uprightness and faithfulness engraved on your heart in indelible characters!”
Hớn Minh returned to the pagoda,
and Vân Tiên took off for his land, where he arrived after a month.
At the sight of him, old Lục shed plentiful tears.
Who would have thought that the son, sill alive, was to see his father again in this world?
All the villagers, their close and distant relatives,
were overjoyed and came running to the house, plying him with questions.
It has been many a year, said the old man,
since you fell ill, O my son! Where have you dwelt [since then]?
“Who could count my woes, replied [the man];
but where is my mother's tomb? I wish to go and pay my respects to her!”
He arranges the offerings in the order required by decorum
and pronounces a eulogy before his mother's funeral tablet.
“Soul of my mother! From the banks of the Yellowr Springs, appear miraculously!
Bear witness that on this day your son [addresses you] with a sincere heart!
I think about this life you gave me,
you who carried me lovingly in your womb for nine months!
I think about your sorrows, the tears I made you shed!
Alas that I cannot equal in gratitude the Twenty-four Filial Exemplars!"
Tears rain down from Vân Tiên's eyes.
After the sacrifice, he asks what happened in his father's house [during his absence].
“Thanks to Nguyệt Nga, says his father,
thanks to the gold she gave me, everything has prospered in the house!
Owing to her, we have maintained an honorable situation.
Without her, poverty, hunger would have forced me to leave the country!”
At these words, Vân Tiên sighs
and, his heart brimming with emotion, reflects for an instant,
Where then, he asks, is this maiden to be found?
I want to thank her, to show her my gratitude for her kind deeds and affection!
Old Lục apprised him of what had happened at court,
relating the whole matter, from start to finish, to Vân Tiên.
He, too, was a victim of calumny; he was discharged, driven away!”
“Remembrance of Nguyệt Nga's goodness shall remain engraved on my heart! continued Tiên.
Allow me to go and find her father in order to thank him as well!"
Without stopping even once, he crossed the considerable distance separating him from Tây Xuyên.
When he got there and appeared before Kiều Công, the latter burst into tears.
“Nguyệt Nga, he said, is now in the kingdom of Phiên!
Seeing your face every day, the old man will find peace in his heart again!"
From then on, Vân Tiên frequented the house of Kiểu Công.
Whilst waiting for the competition, he pored over the classics and the historians.
Vân Tiên thanked his host and asked his permission to go to the competition.
he undertook the long journey to the capital without stopping on the way.
Vân Tiên victoriously took first place in the examination.
In the north region he had come across the Raf, and now he was famous!
Vân Tiên went to court to prostrate himself before the sovereign,
Sở Vương, from his golden throne,
The latter, addressing the king, expresses himself in these words:
“Sire,allow me to entrust the leadership of the army to a hero!
He is a man of the Hớn family whose given name is Minh.
In strength he compares to Hạng Võ, in courage he is Trương Phi's equal.
Once he fled following a conviction
and hid, under a bonzeš robes, on Mount Túy Vi.”
Sở Vương, in the midst of his court, issued an edict
pardoning Hớn Minh, calling him back [to the capital]
Pious towards their fathers, faithful to their sovereign, thus are heroes!
The generals of Phiên are two warriors of, equal strength,
One is named Hỏa Hổ, the other Xích Long;
then there is Cốt Độc, the commander in chief,
with a tiger's face, red beard, an aspect strange and fierce,
Hớn Minh sends in the vanguard,
charging both Hỏa Hồ and Xích Long at the same time.
His club falls fast as lightning,
striking both: both of them die!
Commander in chief Cốt Độc, boiling with rage,
an axe in each hand, comes forth to engage Hớn Minh in battle.
Seeing that his foe is resorting to magic spells, he withdraws.
Vân Tiên, with a golden helmet on his head.
and a silver lanee in his hand, riđing a black horse,
casts a glance at the battle. Alone, he advances
he swiftly turns his horse and moves away,
He orders his soldiers to sÏaughter a dog and rub its blood on the top of their flag.
All the cơmbatants smear it on their weapons,
at the sight of which the monsters vanish straightaway!
the great leader and Cốt Độc fight it out without respite till the end of the day,
In no condition to continue fighting, Cốt Độc suddenly flees,
and the greatleader, spurring on his steed, sets ofF swiftly in pursuit.
They cross seven hills in this manner!
How awful was the fate of commander in chief Cốt Độc!
He was racing across Mount Ô Sào
Vân Tiên cut off his head, then,
hanging the head from his horse's neck, he [set about] rejoining his troops.
The sky is black, he knows not how far away [his army] is!
Let us return now to Nguyệt Nga.
She had already been dwelling in that place for over three years,
She was up late one night, sitting close to her lit lamp,
when suddenly she felt an undefinable agitation in her heart.
“What did you once say to me, O Quan Âm? she thinks to herself,
Strange divinity, why did you deceive me? Your words, engraved on my heart, are ceaselessly recited in my memory!
I am resolved to surmount all obstacles!
Even if it means going down to helÌ to seek him, for him to seek me!
Whilst Nguyệt Nga strives to drive out the dark thoughts [besieging her],
suddenly she hears the little chiming bells ofa horse heading towards the house.
A voice is heard: “Whosoever you may be, inhabitants of this abode,
please tell me the way I must take to reach the border post!"
Whilst terror roots Nguyệt Nga to her seat,
Vân Tiên, alighting from his horse, walks straight into the house!
At the sight of hìm, the old lady cries out: “Who is this stranger
entering my home in the middle of the night?
Vân Tiên promptly explains hìmself.
How terrified the old lady was at these words!
Vân Tiên sits down and regards Nguyệt Nga;
then, looking at the portrait, he begins to suspect something already.
“What is this picture? he asks.
I admire the art with which it has rendered features similar to mine!
All is not yet clear in this matter!
Tell me, I beg you, Madam, the model's name!”
The old lady dares not lie.
“In truth, she says, it is the portrait of the husband of the maiden you see seated here!”
“Young lady, says Tiên, please bring it close to me
and tell me the full name of the person it represents. I await your answer!”
The face seems the same to her, but is not the person different?
She remains seated, veiling her blushing face with the sleeves of her dress.
At this sight, Vân Tiên smiles a bit.
“Why then, he resumes, do you not answer, maiden?
Nguyệt Nga, redoubling her reserve, replies:
“The man this picture portrays bears the given name of Vân Tiên.
He has returned from his sojourn in the Nine Springs',
I have resolved to remain faithful to him forever, and to withdraw from this deceitful world!"
Hearing her speak thus, Vân Tiên puts [another] question to her:
“You tell me the husbandS name, but what is the wife's?”
The maiden at once frankly makes herself known to him.
Vân Tiên falls to his knees and, crossing his arms on his chest, says to her;
“Because I find you again in this place today,
allow me to bow to you three times! Then I will tell you all!
You have kept your oath with an inviolable fdelity,
I have been favored by your goodness, so must I in turn show my gratitude!
In truth, Vân Tiên is my name!
Now we are reunited, my greatest wish has come true!”
Nguyệt Nga is overwhelmed with amazement.
Half believing, she says: “It is my husband!” Half doubting, she wonders who this might be.
“If you are indeed Vân Tiên, she says to him,
Vân Tiên recounts their past adventure,
whereupon Nguyệt Nga bursts into tears.
The more he tells of past service and affection, the happier her heart grows.
While they are stilÌ immersed in their memories, dawn spreads its Rirst glimmers.
Vân Tiên mounts his horse and is about to join [the troops],
when he sees the name Hớn Minh written on a banner.
The latter then halts the marching soldiers,
the two friends rejoice and tell each other what has transpired,
“Where is the young lady? asks Minh,
Introduce me to her so I can meet my sister-in-law!”
Vân Tiên introduces Hớn Minh.
Nguyệt Nga rises and graciously offers him words of welcome.
“I thought you were in the barbarians clutches, says Minh,
and I had made up my mind to lead my cavalry all the way to the land of Ô Qua,
but here we are now reunited in the same house!
Now the war is over, we shall return to the capital Singing songs of triumph!”
Tiên says: “What do you intend to do, lady?”
“Warrior chief, the maiden replies, you must return to court
I might first obtain a pardon. Then I will finally be able to return home!”
The Great Scholar thanked the old woman,
commending himselfto her and entrusting Nguyệt Nga to her care for a few days.
I shall ask hìm for your pardon, and I shall take you straight to your house!"
Tiên and Minh mounted and turned back,
leading the multitudinous army back to the capital.
Sở Vương, learning of the Great Scholar's return,
sent officers to bring hìm before the throne, serving as his honor escort.
The king walked down to the bottom of the golden steps,
holding in his hand a cup of spirits, a reward for the Great Scholar's valor.
“The kingdom of Phiên, he says, had struck fear in us,
by dint of Cốt Độc§ wondrous and supernatural powers,
but Cốt Độc is now no longer,
and truly the Heavens had the Great Scholar born to rescue our realm!
If only the Great Scholar had made himself known earlier!
We would not have been reduced to offering Nguyệt Nga in tribute!
Today we shall celebrate the crushing of the Ô Qua rebels!"
“The Great Scholar, kneeling before the throne,
expounded clearly and in every detail the matter of Nguyệt Nga.
Sở Vương was struck with profound amazement at this account
and said: "Until today we had thought that maiden was in the land of Phiên!
We did not know that she had previously
made plans of matrimony with the Great Scholar.”
The Thái sư kneels before the steps of the throne.
“For a long time, he says, the Ô Qua revolts aroused nothing but fear,
and the cause is still a fraudulent substitution of one wife for another!
Nguyệt Nga is truly guilty of treason!"
promptly brings in the portrait, kneels and presents it in proof of his claims.
Sở Vương examines it and says:
“For her chastity, Nguyệt Nga bears comparison to the women of olden days!
From the beginning, the Thái sư acted without thinking,
Were there then no women of the people that he must turn to this maiden?
Although the sun and moon shine to all eyes,
they still cannot light up the inside of an overturned vasel So it is that we, through the public voice, were deceived!
[But] good men and bad are under the eyes of Heaven and Earth!
If, in the present matter, an injustice has been committed, it may be imputed to our credulity!”
[Then] the Great Scholar, in the presence of the whole court, made the following accusations:
Trịnh Hâm is a wicked man,
Rising in anger before his throne, Sở Vương spoke thus:
Many an unfaithful subject was seen in antiquity,
but in our day the Thái sư rivals those of yore!
We know at last today which heart is loyal, which wicked!
We erred in choosing ourselves an [unworthy] servant!
But enough! In spite of all, we wish to show mercy!
We divest the Thái sư of his title. Let hìm return among the people!
Trịnh Hâm is a cruel and wicked man.
We leave it up to the Great Scholar to pass judgment on him.
Nguyệt Nea is a pure and chaste maiden.
We hereby award her the title of Princess oƒ the Second Rank!
Whilst Vương, Hớn and Bùi,
eating and drinking, were giving themselves up to jubilation,,
the Great Scholar put the following question to them in a few words:
“What judgment, in your opinion, should I mete out to the guilty Trịnh Hâm?”
Then he ordered his guards to bring in the guilty party.
The latter looked at them all and greeted them as friends.
“Friends! said Minh, who is this man who takes the liberty of calling us that?
To this day you have not acted as a friend! Enough!
Let him be dragged away and beheaded this instant!
That his presence may cease to offend our sight and make us quiver with anger!"
“In his ire, Minh is talking nonsense, said Trực.
Who would take up a golden broadsword to kill a fly?
Down through time, heartless men,
though left alive, have never got anywhere!”
“I appeal to the opinion of an old friend"! said Hâm.
It was the first time I have ever done evil: forgive me!”
“Has a man of lofty soul
ever made a madman perish? said the Great Scholar. To what end?
That will suffice! I, too, wish to show myself magnanimous!
Guards! Untie hìm! Drive him away, off with him!”
Trịnh Hâm was elated to escape death.
After hastily prostrating himself, he withdrew and went home.
As for licentious Bùi Kiệm,
Hớn Minh and Tử Trực went to ask the king's permission
to escort the Great scholar returning in glory to his family.
Only Bùi Kiệm forbore to do the same,
ashamed as he was in his heart at having revealed the baseness of his instincts,
The Great Scholar, with a retinue of wheeled carts,
sent the soldiers of the royal guard to bring Nguyệt Nga to his fathers house,
They bore gold and silver to the old woman to reward her,
The Great Scholar, Tử Trực and Hớn Minh set off.
Trịnh Hâm, for his part, was sailing back to Hàn Giang
when a huge wave rose up and sunk his boat like a stone!
He was preyed upon by the fish
and received from Heaven, verily!, just retribution for his crimes!
Up until this day, the young servant had been guarding the tomb.
Days, months had gone by, nearly three years elapsed,
and during those three years he had gone singing and begging alms,
[for] he was resolved to bring Vân Tiên's bones back to his native land.
he had not left Đại Đề, where he wandered ever in solitude,
The Great Scholar, upon arriving there,
“Soul of my young companion! he says, if you are endowed with powers,
[But] Heaven, to, has compassion for sincere souls!
At that instant the Great Scholar addresses him.
After several years, Master and servant, at last reunited,
The Great Scholar, at this moment, felt great joy,
for master and servant had found cach other again at Đại Đề!
and after journeying for over a week, they found themselves close to Hàn Giang.
Since Võ Công had gone down to the Yellow Springs,
Thể Loan and old Quỳnh Trang lived sunk in bitter sorrow,
[But] while beset with worries and apprehension,
they learned that Vân Tiên was alive and that his hour of glory had come.
“It was once a question of marriage between us, [said the mother];
why not head him off on the road? Who knows?”
“I acted badly towards him! said Loan,
and I fear he will remember the days he spent in the cave!”
“You still have charms! said Trang,
let him but set eyes on you and his heart will speak!
If he still recalls his old grievances,
well both put all the blame on Võ Công!
When they had conferred at length,
[Thể Loan] consulted her mirror, smoothed her hair, and went out to meet the husband she coveted.
Letus now turn to the Great Scholar!
As soon as he reached Hàn Giang, he halted his soldiers.
Gold, silver, jewelry and garments,
the Great Scholar brought all this to reward the fisherman and the woodcutter for their kindness.
These two old men were henceforth notables!
For a momentary service they received a hundred wagonfuls of riches!
The Great Scholar had only just left them.
when he noticed Quỳnh Trang standing among his guards.
and we have come, my daughter and I, to congratulate the Great Scholar!
Võ Công has gone down to the Yellow Springs.
Have pity on the unhappy lot ofa maiden of distinction!”
If you were carrying a glass filled with water, said the Great Scholar,
and suddenly spilled it on the ground, could you gather up the contents in your hands?
I have paid my debt to misfortune in suffering your injustice!
Do I then owe aught else which you have come here to claim?”
Hớn Minh and Tử Trực stood there watching.
Here we have flowers well skilled in luring bees! they said.
“They truly possess a most remarkable impudence!
How can you have the audacity to come here [today]? What [do you think] to gain?
Why not let them come with us, O my brother?
You could in return give them to our sister, they would carry her shoes!”
Mother and daughter remained rooted to the spot with shame and confusion!
Hastening to Prostrate themselves, they turned their heels and went away.
Whilst returning home, before reaching their abode,
they espied two tigers that leapt tp and barred their path.
They pounced upon both mother and daughter at once
and, carrying them into the cave of the Green Pines, abandoned them there,
Amid this jumble of rocks, an insurmountable barrier,
[the women] moaned and groaned, with no hope of ever leaving [their prison]!
Then they regretted all those days lost arranging their finery!
and how [even] in the throes of adversity one must remain united to the end.
Beware! Beware of following the mother and daughters example!
They have disappeared forever, though the memory of their misdeed [abides] as if engraved on a stele!
The Great Scholar proceeded to Đông Thành.
Old Lục had already had a house of comely appearance built there,
and everything was arranged for the six ceremonies.
All the mandarins came to enhance through their presence the nuptials of Nguyệt Nga ,
The parents on both sides, worthy of one another,
joyfully saw their two houses united that through these accomplished spouses.
Long were the years of their happiness,
and the children they bore were to follow, down through the ages, in their virtuous footsteps.
Kiểu Công, promoted to the title of governor,
was by royal edict put in charge of ruÌing the district of Đông Thành.
He issued a proclamation far and wide insistently demanding
information about the [residence] of the Lục family.
The latter obeyed and appeared at the palace.
When Kiều Công asked him for news of Vân Tiên,
the old man, remembering his son, began to weep and moan.
“Rumor has it, he said,
that my child fell ilÌ and [his soul], forsaking its body, left him lying in the road!
Since then I have had no news of him,
Kiều Công, in the throes ofa cruel uncertainty,
went back inside his palace and conveyed to Nguyệt Nga these words.
O my father, please send for him to come hither!”
Nguyệt Nga is standing in her chamber, leaning against the wall,
clasping the portrait [of Vân Tiên] in her arms, and from her eyes rain tears.
“Where is the object of this old love [now]? says Công.
O my dear daughter, present [this picture] to the eyes of Lục!”
The old man sits down and beholds it a while.
whereupon Lục is abreast of everything.
Who can tell the sorrow that overwhelms Nguyệt Nga?
“In this world, he says, man resembles the shadow of a mayfly:
I believed my son [utterly] lost to me;
who would have told me that hỉs features remained fixed in this likeness?
Now that I can see my child here,
my heart will keep a sweet memory of him, an indelible memory!
O wide Earth! O lofty Heavens! Lend an ear to my groans!
Old Lục takes his leave and moves off,
Kiều Công has his servants escort him.
Nguyệt Nga has fallen ill, lamenting,
To this day she has suffered from waiting!
It would have been better for her had they never met!
“We were acquainted. quite briefly, she says.
One of us is still here, and the other, O heavens!, has pernished!
When I loved that minent man, did I know when [his star] would wane?
In letters, ìn the art of war, who would dare compare himself to him?
I weep because, having devoted himself to unrelenting studies,
I weep because he was allotted only sixteen years!
In this world, man is like unto a mayfly: he toils, he strives, to no avail!
I weep because he did not have time to gain fame!
His grand deeds were obliterated in advance; just as a wreck washed away by the current vanishes, so his reputation has wilted like a flower!
I weep for our thwarted marriage!
Who in future will watch over the sticks of incense and the cup of water?
“Through all five watches of the night, my tears flow unceasing!
At the sight of the portrait I here behold, I feel my heart being rent.
in the world of the dead will we at least be reunited?”
Kiều Công rises and leaves [his chambers],
his heart sinks at hearing his daughter wail,
“O my childl! he says, do not give yourself up to despair!
This misfortune is due to the unforeseen play of the secrets of destiny!"
“Who can describe my grief! rejoins the maiden.
Out of the blue, I saw my yoke break in midstride!
Since the maÌe and female phoenix are now parted,
But I swear! Never will my heart, like the heart of a commoner,
leaving my husband in the Ngân River, go in search of another on the Lam Bridge
As long as your daughter remains standing under the Yault of heaven,
allow her to đevote her life to worshipping this picture, she desires nothing more!”
Kiểu Công is far from satisiied.
If you wish to keep your chastity, he says, what can say against that?”
A man ofnoble descent, holding a high office,
and bearing, at the sovereign's court, the eminent title of Thái sư,
heard tell that Kiểu Công's daughter,
having attained the age of sixteen, had no husband yet.
He sent gifts
Kiều Công, loath to compel his daughter,
sent the presents back to the Thái sư with due ceremony.