The Southern emperor rules the Southern land
Our destiny is writ in Heaven’s Book
How dare ye bandits trespass on our soil
Ye shall meet your undoing at our hands
The Bachdang River
Blue peaks are swords and lances thrust at clouds
The dragon swallows waves and spews white spray
After spring rain flowers deck the earth like gems
in chilly winds pines hum and stir the sky
Open your eyes admire your timeless land
bow and recall the strife of Viéts and Huns
Down goes the sunthe river’s flowing red
is that the blood undried of those war killed
Posthorses galloped through miasmal wilds
You brought your star to light this seaside realm
A hero’s will can face the world at large
a sovereign’s heart should treat all men alike
Yiich hills and streams give poets peerless lines
Chou rain and dew pour from the emperor’s writ
Tomorrow we shall sunder South and North
today do not turn down this cup of wine
Blue limpid water smoothly flows like oil
A thousand tributaries feed this stream
Those fools from Wu have all been washed away
vassals of Viét have all been cleansed of dirt
The throne stands strong highsoaring like Mount T’ai
Where has it wandered off Omar’s lost soul
The world’s at peaceall sharks lie still as rice
Let’s take our ease and cast our nets or lines
6 Homage to the Trung queens
To slay the people’s foe and wreak revenge
two sisters took up arms for their just cause
One battle put Su Ting’s scared wits to rout
a hundred tribes rose up to guard Lingnan'
They climbed the thronelarge bounties they bestowed
They donned their crownssweet blessings they conferred
While streams and hills endure their shrine shall stand
a monument to peerless womanhood
The old banyan tree
It finds a home amid the woods and brooks
When springtime comes it dons the green of spring
Not good enough for pillars and for beams
it shelters common folk beneath its shade
Three ranks of men three grades of things
There are three ranks of men three grades of things
It’s wise to know that flowers now bloom now fade
A feast is spread awaiting worthy guests
the seats of state wait ready for high skills
Must we let vulgar hands draw Heaven’s sword
Should wicked scoundrels hone the crescent ax
Allseeing majesty shines there on high
need any person cry and hawk pure gold
37 Catfish and Toad
Of old and now the world has tales to tell
strange stories making plain the universe
And animals who hardly know one whit
will argufy the cause and end of things
Long long ago HeCatfish and HeToad
once quarreled and provoked a bitter feud
HeToad had his own burrow by a lake
but proudly haunted halls and seats of power
Now when his pregnant wife had reached her term
she hopped into a pond where fish did live
and there she spawned. She feasted her fond eyes 
upon her brood, then to her den retired. 
He-Catfish chanced to come along and found 
the school of tadpoles in a noisy romp. 
When he caught sight of them, his heart rejoiced: 
there was no doubt—they looked like catfish babes! 
He took them home—he loved and cherished them, 
adopting them as his own flesh and blood. 
But next, to view his offspring came He-Toad 
when taboo-observation time was past.! 
With bated breath, he looked and looked about: 
the pond was hushed and bare—no sign of life! 
He bottled up his anger and hopped in 
to paddle round and search for his lost tribe. 
By midnight he was still there churning mud. 
Disturbed, He-Catfish surfaced and inquired. 
He saw He-Toad in ambush on the bank, 
and straightaway he raised a hue and cry: 
“Hey, Toad, it’s night! Why are you prowling here? 
To plan a theft or work some lewd design?”? 
“Look who’s the mischief-monger!” croaked He-Toad. 
“You’re guilty of a horrid crime yourself. 
I’ve braved the dark for my dear brood you stole. 
If not, would I have stooped to visit you?” 
He-Catfish, smarting from the taunt he heard, 
pricked up his whiskers and reviled He-Toad: 
“Why, Toad! How bold and impudent you are!# 
And what a handsome figure you all cut! 
Your kind will never mend—once smeared with lime, 
you'll take your acrid temper to the grave!* 
To one theft victim, ten will look like thieves.* 
How do you know who did it? Why blame me? 
Stop trying to match wits with me, my friend. 
Go back and squat yourself beneath some bed!” 
Angry He-Toad bugged out his eyes and growled: 
“Though smart, you’re stuck inside a stagnant pond! 
I may be short on brains, but I frequent 
those stately mansions where the mighty live. 
I move amid the purple and the gold 
or roam the kingdom at my own sweet will. 
Each time I grind my teeth, I shake the skies® 
and strike the souls of men with darkest fears. 
But what are you good for, you smelly fish? 
Once boiled, you'll yield a ladleful of broth!” 
And choked with helpless rage, He-Toad went home. 
Husband and wife took counsel night and day. 
She said, “The children are quite small and young. 
Away from us, how can they bear the cold? 
Forget about the means to win a feud— 
let’s pay whatever price and buy them back.” 
“Your head spins such bright notions!” he replied. 
“Why should we put ourselves to such expense? 
What does a shallow woman really know’ 
to meddle and suggest this scheme or that? 
He-Catfish covets our own flesh and blood: 
I’ll sue him, then—let’s do or die in court! 
I'll carry to the yamen my complaint, 
and when the case is tried, the truth will out!” 
The prefect-judge perused the plaintiffs bill, 
then summoned all his staff of clerks and scribes: 
“I’ve read He-Toad’s complaint from first to last: 
to steal somebody’s children is no joke! 
I’ve yet to ascertain the hidden facts, 
but it looks like a pickle as of now! 
Go draft a warrant and arrest the knave, 
and haul all witnesses before the court.” 
With due instructions scribes and clerks went out 
and made He-Toad cough up the usual fees. 
The drafted summons was approved and signed— 
a bailiff was dispatched to serve it soon. 
Now brandishing his warrant of arrest, 
the bailiff swaggered off, bound for Clear Pond. 
Once there, he ordered village chiefs to catch 
and fetch the suspect—Catfish was his name. 
Greeting the man who came to question them, 
all gathered, spread the table, poured much wine. 
The bailiff said: “Like thunder is the law, 
so where it’s told to strike, right there it strikes!® 
He-Catfish perpetrated his foul deed, 
and all of you have lent him help and aid! 
If I obey my orders to the full, 
your flesh and bones will fall to bits and shreds! 
But mercy is the other arm of law— 
take care to gratify my softer side. 
As long as judge and clerks are still far off, 
don’t anger me, or strokes shall rain on you!” 
He-Catfish reared his head and pleaded hard: 
“Why would this churl have dared to flout the law? 
Some liar’s pinned a bogus charge on me! 
Please help me, uncle. As the proverb says, 
‘One day in jail, a thousand years at large!’? 
I beg to pay, no matter what the sum. 
I have two friends and neighbors, Carp and Tench— 
both can be counted on to back me up. 
For our good magistrate, I’ll purchase gifts: 
what need be done, I promise, shall be done!” 
Those words were music to the bailiff’s ear. 
He led them all to the abode of law. 
Before the judge he dropped a bow, then said: 
“At your behest, I’ve bid them all appear!”
The judge held court and tried the case forthwith: 
“You, Catfish, dared commit the vilest crime! 
The plaintiff, Toad, who’s kneeling there, asserts 
you kidnapped all his children: yes or.no?” 
He-Catfish first kowtowed before the judge, 
then, perking up, he told his tale at length: 
“He-Toad must bear full blame for this affair. 
At night he came and squatted by my pond. 
So, raising the alarm, I gave a shout 
and plainly saw him scamper through my hedge. 
Afraid I would expose his foul offense, 
he covered it all up with his false charge. 
For if indeed they were his flesh and blood, 
would he have dumped them there, in my cold pond? 
We little folk live lives as cheap as dirt! 
Please spare me gross injustice—weigh the facts!” 
“No more of your pert talk!” the prefect snapped, 
then summoned fish to take the witness stand. 
Tench, Bass, and Carp—all three came forth at once 
and prostrated themselves before the judge: 
“We all are simple folk—we mean no harm. 
A poor, clean living’s all we have eked out. 
Others may want to venture down the stream— 
we are content to dodge those nets and traps. 
Who knows what Toad or Catfish brewed and hatched, 
yet with complicity we now stand charged! 
May Heaven’s lamp cast light on right and wrong! 
The wall’s caught fire—should fish die in the moat?”!° 
Before the court He-Toad now put his case: 
“They all are kith and kin, as thick as thieves! 
Their water and our land are worlds apart— 
how are dry toads to fare among wet fish? 
Before Your Highness, may I bow and pray? 
From hapless exile save our children, please!” 
“Well, let He-Toad go home,” the prefect said. 
“For further hearings bolt He-Catfish in!” 
The zealous bailiffs did as they were told 
and promptly clapped He-Catfish into jail. 
Alas, they kept him under lock and key: 
ten men closed in—on one—and bled him white. 
From mandarin to bailiffs orders flowed: 
they cangued his neck by day and chained his legs by night; 
they cut his hide to rags and shreds, 
His wife watched his ordeal and sorely grieved. 
To save him she would spare no costs or pains. 
She wandered over hill and dale to find 
somebody with the answer to her prayer. 
She heard a bravo’s name—through go-betweens, 
she reached Stargazer’s lair for his advice.' 
In detail she told him what troubled her: 
“I’m married to He-Catfish—his chief wife. 
Because He-Toad has lodged a false complaint, 
my husband’s landed in a prison cell. 
A foolish woman only bungles things— 
please figure out some way to set him free.” 
“I’m willing to oblige,” Stargazer said. 
“But I need not go plead with anyone. 
For I’ve got Pike, a village mayor back there— 
he’s my own man: my wish is his command. 
A holy terror for all his born days! 
You’re in a fix—I’ll have him succor you.” 
The bravo’s word transported her with joy— 
she hurried to find Pike and woo his aid. 
She came before him bearing lavish gifts: 
prawns, squids, and dainty bits, the tongue’s delights. 
“I know what makes them tick, those yamen chaps,” said Pike, 
“those foxes clad in tigers’ coats!” 
You wish to win your lawsuit with all speed? 
I’ll have you talk to Shiner, their head clerk. 
If things are to come off without a hitch, 
you also must grease well all yamen palms!” 
Once Pike had seen the judge behind closed doors, 
the female catfish went to his court hall. 
Down on her knees, she pled: “With our respects, 
accept these gifts and pity my poor clod! 
He-Catfish twice was nabbed and thrown in jail 
because the facts were twisted out of shape. 
He thinks straight thoughts, he dared no crooked schemes. 
Please open wide the merciful T’ang net!”
“Since you’re beseeching me,” the judge declared, 
“T shall not poke beneath the hair for scars!  
As far as I can see from all the facts, 
He-Toad may lack firm grounds for his complaint. 
Let the accuser face him he’s accused, 
for I must hear both sides to know the truth.” 
He-Toad, who was then crouching by a wall, 
dashed out at that pronouncement and burst forth: 
“Dame Catfish, no fast talk! I would not fear 
winged tigers, let alone the finny tribe! 
Your husband stole our children in broad day, 
and he’s charged me with trespassing at night! 
Does he expect to live forevermore 
and see his serpents swallow up a whale?! 
They can teach monkeys how to climb a tree,!
they goad one side, they egg the other on.!” 
Those altar rats or rampart foxes strut 
and flaunt their borrowed power to hurt the weak.!
Whose hand will kill the deer and win the day?!9
The fight is on: birds’ beaks against rats’ fangs!
“None of your lip, Sir Toad!” the prefect roared. 
“You need not mouth it so to state your case. 
Here, bailiff! Tell the clerks to go and make 
a thorough inquest—gather all the facts. 
If they establish guilt and foul intent, 
He-Catfish shall be punished by the book.” 
The clerks obeyed their order, hit the road— 
all in a body hastened toward Clear Pond. 
Arriving there, they summoned village chiefs 
to show them round and help them learn the truth. 
They found those tadpoles in a frisk and romp 
quite near the surface—little swarthy ones. 
“No shadow of a doubt!” the clerks agreed. 
“From head to tail they look like catfish, yes!” 
After recording what they had observed, 
they hurried back, submitted their report: 
“Before your lofty virtue we bow low! 
We made a careful inquest in your name. 
He-Catfish was accused on no good ground, 
a fact the village chiefs themselves confirm.” 
The prefect had He-Toad hauled in and said: 
“You, brazen rascal, filed a perjured charge! 
Now my inquirers have come back and cleared 
He-Catfish of the crime you laid to him.” 
He-Toad kowtowed and told the magistrate: 
“To shield He-Catfish, clerks and scribes have lied! 
He’s crammed so many goodies down their throats— 
no wonder what they say does stink of fish!” 
The charge incensed those yamen hands—they begged 
to clap He-Toad in jail and serve him right. 
“The case must be retried,” the prefect said. 
“Pending a verdict, lock in this He-Toad!” 
Now huddled up, He-Toad just sighed and groaned, 
seething with righteous wrath against the world: 
“Heaven above, would that you knew my plight! 
I'll gnash my teeth, then you'll hear me, perhaps. 
If they malign me and will cause my death, 
may your celestial thunder strike them down!” 
To her poor Toad, who tossed and turned all night, 
the wife proposed a course she had thought out: 
“Let me consult a doctor of the laws 
and quickly learn how to proceed in court. 
If we just try to measure wits with them, 
it will not work and we may come to grief. 
Please let me go and do what need be done. 
I shall not quit until revenge is ours!” 
She-Toad set forth to roam and rove afield, 
crossing from Bufoland to Ranaburg. 
She’d wade this stream and climb that hill; she’d search 
deep wells and thickets, anguish in her heart. 
One day, as she trudged on through wind and rain, 
she spotted someone in a field: He-Frog. 
He had been squatting there, at pleasant ease, 
when he laid eyes on her, so up he hopped. 
He asked her, “Where did you come from, my dear? 
But you don’t seem to wear your freshest looks! 
Is something ailing you? What is amiss? 
All frogs and toads are kin—you can speak out!” 
“There’s nothing wrong with me,” She-Toad replied. 
“But I must save my husband and my home! 
He-Catfish is an arrant thief and rogue! 
He stole our brood, then slandered my poor Toad. 
He oiled the palms of mandarin and clerks— 
it followed that my Toad was sent to jail. 
I’ve traveled hills and streams to come this far. 
I pray you—rescue us from our dire pass!” 
“Bare field, plain water—here’s my home,” he said. 
“Loud though I croak, my voice is empty air. 
Among famed doctors of the laws there’s one 
who doctors them expertly: our Tree Frog! 
He knows the yamen well—the ins and outs. 
He breaks its statutes, juggles with its rules. 
You want to see your troubles all resolved? 
Go track him down and ask for his advice!” 
After she heard the Frog explain all things, 
She-Toad then rushed back home to start again. 
Across the realm, through silent groves and woods, 
she tramped the lonesome trail on tireless feet. 
Then, as a pretty scene came into view, 
she stopped her quest and tarried in the shade. 
A gentle rain was falling on the grass— 
she glimpsed a little sprawler: that Tree Frog! 
“I welcome you, my sister,” greeted he. 
“What prompted you to come and seek me out? 
Your distant home’s a thousand miles from here— 
how did you know your way to make the trip?” 
“I thank you for your kindly words,” she said. 
“What would I not go through for my loved ones! 
It so enrages me to talk of him— 
He-Catfish caused us all our griefs and woes. 
We’ve suffered countless wrongs without redress 
and held our anger till we’re fit to burst. 
They throw their weight around and crush the weak; 
they tamper with the laws and wreak such harm! 
From mandarin to clerks, they all are crooks. 
For long they have tormented my poor Toad— 
mere thought of it just rankles in my soul! 
I knew of no one who could counsel me. 
I took He-Frog’s advice—I did not dread 
the far, rough trek and found my way to you. 
Whatever action wisdom might suggest 
to save my Toad and toadlings, tell me, please!” 
The Tree Frog laughed: “A woman’s rigmarole! 
But you don’t know a thing about the world. 

We share a common fate—we all shall die. 
Why fight and war with our own kind? What for? 
He-Catfish is an utter, hopeless fool— 
he’s gone clean daft with greed, can’t think too deep. 
Well, cease your squabbles and disputes at law. 
Your brood is in their pond—what can you do? 
Just let that dumb He-Catfish nurture them. 
It’s best to wait till they’ve all shed their tails— 
then by themselves they’ll find their way back home! 
The case can then be settled with no fuss: 
petition for full custody—a cinch! 
If you still wish to pick a bone with him, 
against He-Catfish file a countersuit!” 
With eagerness She-Toad concurred and said: 
“T’ll make him feel the sting of all my spite 
and teach him not to bluster any more!” 
She-Toad now bowed her thanks and took her leave. 
Back to the yamen she was quick to trot. 
She told He-Toad, then at the pond she peeked, 
and what Tree Frog had said was plain to see. 
she came before the judge with many gifts. 
A written plea in hand, she entered first— 
a covey of her toadlings hopped behind. 
In open court the prefect read her piece 
and almost threw a fit. He thundered out: 
“But how could this have happened, such a freak? 
My orders went unheeded by those clerks! 
All ye who made the inquest, come in here! 
I should let my assistant handle this!” 
The yamen scribes craved mercy on their knees: 
“At your command we went and we inquired. 
With our own eyes we saw their catfish shape, and only then did we draft our report. 
But nature’s played an impish prank on us 
and, out of nowhere, darkly conjured change! 
Deep in our hearts we hold to Right and Law: 
how could we have presumed to tell a lie?” 
“The case remains unsettled,” sighed the judge. 
“Arraign He-Catfish, put the scamp on trial! 
A twin-lash whip! A cudgel! Flog the knave, 
make him own up, and straighten it all out! 
He dared to toy with lives—in Heaven’s sight 
he robbed a couple of their flesh and blood! 
I shall enforce the laws and banish him 
to the full distance of three thousand miles. 
Seize all his riches, all his worldly goods, 
and go bestow them all as alms or doles. 
But as for you, Dame Toad, stop squawking, pray! 
You’ve got your toadlings back—complain no more. 
He-Catfish did brew mischief in his breast: 
I’ve doomed the rogue to exile—that’s the end!” 
The haughty lord passed sentence with those words, 
and now He-Toad hopped in, knelt down, and said: 
“As I look up to you, Your Eminence, 
your kindness stands sea-deep and mountain-high— 
you shone your pity on our little toads! 
We’ve brought some trifles, tokens of our thanks.” 
“Hey, there, shut off that gush!” the prefect cried. 
“So I’ve deserved a bit of gratitude! 
But need you come here bearing gifts and such? 
Though I esteem the thought, please take them back!” 
After more bows, He-Toad and wife withdrew, 
and arm in arm, bliss-drunk, they hopped away. 
They had no sooner left the yamen gate 
than clerks and scribes snatched presents from their hands. 
They set upon both toads—they groped and pawed, 
claiming his flask of wine, her box of tea ... 
Thus, having won his suit, He-Toad came home. 
Over mum wine or lotus tea
he told his triumph to his kin, while our Tree Frog was softly chanting verse, asprawl close by. 
Then both joined in the raucous merriment 
to drink their fill and sing themselves quite hoarse. 
By lucky chance their paths had somehow crossed. 
Like will to like—and thus two heroes met! 
You watch the world go round and want to laugh. 
It’s just a comedy played out for fun. 
Let these few words, embroidered into verse, 
set forth some truths that one and all may see. 