Red-Haired Xuan's Luck in Love
The Compassion of Mrs. Deputy
Customs Officer
Thursday at 3:00 P.M.
Inside the tree-lined tennis stadium two Frenchmen served and
volleyed at the net on the far-left court. A pair of ball boys ambled
lethargically back and forth, retrieving and returning loose balls. The
players swung their rackets lazily, their shirts soaked through with
perspiration.
"Xanh ca!"
"Xanh xit!"
The patter of tennis balls and the scorekeeper's voice rang out
rhythmically against the humming of tens of thousands of cicadas.
Outside on the street a lemonade vendor squatted against the
handles of his cart to talk business with a fellow street merchant.
"Damn! How come it's so dead on Thursday?"
"It's still early. Anyway, I hear that from now on they'll be playing
every day, not just on Thursday, Saturday, or Sunday."
"Really! How do you know?"
"C'mon! I hear that in three or four months the king plans to
show up with a huge trophy Cup for the winner of some tourna-ment... They're going to be practicing their asses off!"
On the sidewalk, under the shadow of a kapok tree, an elderly
fortune-teller sat quietly, arranging the tools of his trade: a small box,
an ink jar, a tube of lipstick, a pencil holder, and several sample
horoscope charts. From time to time he yawned, taking on the ex-pression of a true philosopher. Nearby, Red-Haired Xuan attempted
to engage a sugarcane girl in deep discussion. Commerce? No! Here
we have a budding love affair. And not just any ordinary love affair.
It is-as today's newspapers might call it-a love affair of the com-mon People (with a capital P).
Extending his hand rudely, Red-Haired Xuan requested a little
love...
"One-track mind!" she scolded him.
"C'mon. Let's have a little. Just a tiny bit!"
"Pervert!"
"Hey, you're not gonna lose it if you use it."
"True, and saving it doesn't mean they'll worship it either. But,
we're not meant to be, and there's nothing in it for me. Nothing's
moving today. You buy squat and bring me nothing but bad luck."
Red-Haired Xuan rose abruptly to his feet and admonished her in
a voice both sulky and heroic.
"I don't need this crap!"
Miss Sugar Cane shot him a bitchy scowl.
"Hey, if you don't need it, then beat it!"
Chuckling like a whinnying horse, Red-Haired Xuan sat back
down.
"I'm kidding. I'm kidding. Of course I need you! We need each
other! Take it easy. Give me a xu's worth of sugarcane."
"Money, please... "
Reaching into his back pocket, Red-Haired Xuan pulled out a
small handkerchief, knotted like a pig's ear. He unfolded it, took out
a coin, and tossed it down dramatically onto the cement pavement.
As Miss Sugar Cane selected and peeled a stalk for him, Xuan began
muttering under his breath.
"Five hi'lo. Let's see... Two left over... I spent three last night
on my buddy. Two hilo for tickets to the nightclub, one for two bowls
of noodle soup with extra-rare beef. Do I know how to enjoy life or
what?! A hell-raiser, that's what I am! Eating and throwing money
around like that... God damn it! But don't worry. Once you agree
to move in with me... of course I'll stop this reckless spending...
You never listen, do you... ?"
But Miss Sugar Cane didn't reply. Xuan chomped noisily on his
stalk, he sucked the sweet juice and spit out the leftover shards in
the direction of a nearby electrical pole. Finally, he wiped his hands
on his pants, stood up, and stretched his back. Miss Sugar Cane
held out nineteen cents in change, but Xuan clasped his hands be-hind his back.
"Right in the front pocket, my dear... Slip those fingers in
here!"
Glaring angrily, Miss Sugar Cane opened her fingers and watched
as the coins tumbled to the pavement, Xuan bent down quickly to
pick them up.
"God damn my mother's milk. All alone on an autumn night, my tender heart is sinking."
Recalling the words of a southern opera, Xuan broke into song,
Xuan sashayed over to the fortune-teller. Stopping abruptly, he
eyeballed the old man like a peasant discovering Madame Be Tfs
famous monkey cages for the first time and blurted out.
"Read my fortune! Short term."
Roused from his nap, the old man peered up at Xuan and, quick
as a policeman writing a ticket, drew a feathered pen from behind
his ear.
"Two hilo. Two hew per reading. Take it or leave it... "
"One hiw. Better than nothing."
"Deal! Where's the money?"
"Here. What do I need with it anyway... "
Crouching down on a mat, Xuan placed a coin before the fortune-teller. The old man unfolded a small piece of tissue paper, ground a
bit of powder from his ink stick, and spit purposefully into a small
ink pot.
"Date of birth?"
"I'm twenty-five, old man. Born the fifteenth day of the tenth
month around the hour when the chickens start to sleep."
The fortune-teller leaned forward on his haunches, mumbled pen-sively to himself, and calculated something on his fingers. Red-Haired Xuan wrapped his arms around his knees and rested his chin
on his wrists. The fortune-teller scribbled a few notes and began
chanting some astrological verse.
Bad stars becloud your personal fate.
Your parents have passed the earthly state,
They wait with fairies in the nether-world,
He stopped chanting.
"If the time of birth you gave me is correct, then your parents
must have died when you were still young."
"Yes! Yes, that's right!"
"Your childhood was filled with hardships."
"It was!"
"Yet, I see that your fate is not totally dark."
He continued to chant,
Propitious stars seem close at hand,
Your name will ring throughout the land.
Fame and the good life are in store for you.
"Great! When do they start?"
"This year. From this year onward, your fate is looking up."
"I've seen no sign of it yet."
"By the end of the year, you'll see."
"How has my fate been so far this year?" he asked.
"Up till now, you've been lucky only in love."
"How do you mean?"
"The stars suggest that women find you irresistible."
Red-Haired Xuan clapped his hands together as if applauding a
well-hit tennis ball.
"Yes! Yes! Yesterday after the show, I passed S~m Cong Lane, and
a group of young ladies loitering on the corner charged toward me.
They grabbed my hands and pulled at my shirt. I must be hot stuff!
You're right on target, old man!"
He turned and sneered at Miss Sugar Cane.
"See!"
Lowering his voice, he whispered to the old man. "Great going!
I've got her right where I want her. Your prophesies are worth the
price!"
Just then, a sleek automobile pulled up in front of the tennis
stadium. The back door opened, and out stepped a hefty woman in
her mid-forties, made up like a fashionable young seductress. Her
face was caked with powder and lipstick, and her newly permed jet-black hair fell in tiny ringlets from beneath an elegant and equally
tiny scarf, She looked to be over seventy kilograms! She clutched a
huge leather purse and a tiny umbrella in one hand, and in the
other she hugged a miniature dog, as other-worldly as a unicorn.
After her came a young man dressed like a Western tourist, He was
tall and very thin, with a pronounced Adam's apple, bulging bug
eyes, and a mop of frizzy hair. Upon leaving the car, he turned and
offered his hand to a young lady still inside, She wore white shorts,
tennis shoes, and her hair up in a bun, In her hand she held two
tennis rackets. Together the threesome entered the tennis stadium.
Fixated on the fortune-teller, Red-Haired Xuan barely noticed
them. Instead, he prattled on about his alleged luck in love and
continued to cross-examine the old man.
"What about money?! Will my fame bring me prosperity, or will I
remain poor?"
"Not rich necessarily, but you'll be comfortable."
At this Xuan drifted off into his own thoughts, and his past
flashed before him. When he was only nine, Xuan had lived with a
distant paternal uncle whom the whole family praised for consent-ing magnanimously to take the boy in as his household servant. It
was not long, however, before the uncle brutally beat Xuan and
threw him out of the house. It seems that the boy had hollowed out
a small hole in the washroom wall in order to spy on his uncle's wife
while she bathed. From that day onward Xuan lived on the streets,
subsisting initially on a diet of wild plums and minnows that he
caught in the Restored Sword Lake. He sold roasted peanuts and
newspapers on streetcorners, ran errands for a theater troupe, and
hawked Tiger Balm aboard the trains. Moving from unskilled job to
unskilled job, Xuan spent so much time outdoors that the sun dyed
his hair a streaky red, as red as the hair of a Westerner. Lacking a
formal education, he grew in street smarts and experience. Finally,
he secured a job as a ball boy at the tennis stadium. There he was
well treated, and his natural skill with a racket made him a favorite
among the French and Vietnamese club members. His game im-proved, and he dreamed of one day becoming as famous as super-stars like Chim or Ciao, if only fate would dispatch a talent scout to
discover his genius. Now, however, he accepted his lot as a simple
ball boy. Although the job was a lowly one, it held out a shred of
hope for future advancement. He saw no future in old-fashioned
professions such as peanut vending, fruit picking, fishing, or run-ning errands for actors. His participation in the Sporting Movement and the Popular Movement made him feel strangely
proud and self-important.
"Look at my face, old man. Do you see success or what?"
The fortune-teller examined Xuan's red-streaked hair, his reced-ing forehead, his oversized jaw, his long flute of an upper lip, and
his comically thick ears.
"Looks good. Your future looks very good, indeed. It's just too
bad that your hair is no longer black."
"Damn it! That's what I get for not having a hat!"
Suddenly a little boy ran out of the tennis stadium, calling his
name.
"Hey Xuan! Where are you!? She's here! She needs a partner! Are
you coming or what!?"
Red-Haired Xuan repeated quizzically:
"She's here?"
"Yes! It's that bitch, Miss Civilization-the one with the bean pole
husband. And the other bitch, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer, is here
as well. She wants to play, too!"
Xuan stood up and barked at the fortune-teller:
"Write it down for
me, old man. I'll pick it up this afternoon or tomorrow. I've paid
already, don't forget. Time for a little ken co bans with the lovely lady.
Just another notch in my belt!"
As he dashed toward the stadium, Xuan flashed Miss Sugar Cane
a flirty smile.
"O Voaf Till tomorrow!"
He entered the stadium and found three players waiting for him
at the far-right court...
"Good afternoon, Grandmother. Good afternoon, Sir. Good after-noon, Madame."
nodded their heads in acknowledg-ment, but Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer turned away in disgust. The
younger woman grinned knowingly at her husband.
He said sternly to Xuan:
"My aunt does not approve of such formal language."
"You stupid ass!" Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer chimed in bitterly.
"Who are you calling Grandmother? I'm no older than your
mother. Do I look old enough to have delivered your mother? Why, I
bet your mother is nothing more than a-"
"Yes, yes, Madame. I was mistaken. Please forgive me."
As the anger of this genuine Me Tay began to dissipate, Xuan
grabbed his racket and took to the court. Bop! Bop! The ball flew
back and forth... Fixated on the creamy whiteness of Miss Civiliza-tion's thighs, Xuan failed to return several of her serves, thus creat-ing the impression that her game had improved.
Still angry from the earlier insult, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer
gritted her teeth. "The Annamese are so stupid."
"Just ignore it Auntie," responded Mr. Civilization.
"I must play sports. Otherwise, I'll get old."
"I totally agree. But do you really feel this way, Auntie? Do you
really like sports? If so, it is a great victory for sports! A harbinger of
progress for Vietnam! And a sign of prosperity for our race!"
He spoke with an enthusiasm characteristic of numerous skinny
and sickly men who celebrate the merits of sports without ever
actually playing them. In the same vein he displayed a contempt for
foreign diplomas that was common among Vietnamese students
who had returned from six or seven years in France without ever
actually earning one. In France he had grown close, so he claimed,
to numerous well-known authors and statesmen-vice ministers
and prime ministers-some so famous that their names had ap-peared in the Vietnamese press. When he returned home, the Secu-rity Police ordered two agents to follow him around. After three long
months they concluded that his only secret activity involved fur-tively smoking Camel cigarettes. Eventually, he married a rich wife
and adopted the surname Van Minh, meaning "civilization"-a fact
suspiciously noted by the Security Office. Through intensified sur-veillance they discovered that he had added his wife's surname, Van
(literature), to his own name, Minh (light), hence creating the new
name. He saw the placement of his wife's name before his own as a
simple act of gallantry and not, as others had surmised, as a sign of
protest against patriarchy or an attempt to spearhead some sort of
national or international reform movement. In fact, it signified noth-ing at all.
Since people now referred to him as Mr. Civilization, he felt com-pelled to support the ongoing campaign for Europeanization. To him
this seemed a logical project, given the meaning of his new name.
Soon thereafter, he overheard that universal truth-a healthy soul
demands a healthy body-and thus he became a passionate proponent
of sports, targeting his wife first and then the world at large. Unfortu-nately, his participation in the Europeanization campaign plunged
him into such deep contemplation that he had precious little time for
sports or for any exercise at all.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer's background is equally instructive.
As a teenager, she had been raped by a Western soldier while jour-neying outside of her village to attend an Armistice Day festival. The
soldier followed this unlawful rape with years of lawful rape-he
married her, in other words. Afterwards, the soldier rose to the post
of deputy customs officer and died ten years later. His death was not
only a function of his fidelity to the state but of his unswerving
fidelity to his wife-she literally screwed him to death. Almost im-mediately, she remarried a young official (this one of domestic vin-tage) who passed away under similar circumstances two years later.
Because she had no known affairs, the tongues of poisonous snakes
spread rumors that her poor husband had died of exhaustion while
tending to her erotic flame-a flame fanned incessantly by her atten-tive admirers. It was her marital fidelity, in other words, that drove
her poor husband to his death.
Two French girls and a young Vietnamese man appeared court-
side, and Xuan chivalrously offered up his racket. When one of the
French girls entered the changing room, Red-Haired Xuan abruptly
disappeared.
The court buzzed with greetings and small talk. Balls flew back
and forth like bats chasing mosquitoes through the air.
Moments later, a Frenchman emerged from behind the changing
room, pulling Red-Haired Xuan by the hair. A small crowd gathered
around as the Frenchman cursed Xuan and slapped him about the
face and head. Xuan, it seems, had been up to his old tricks: spying
on the French girl as she changed out of her skirt and into her tennis
shorts. The Tennis Association fired him on the spot, refusing to
forward him the remainder of his monthly salary.
Watching the scene unfold, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer thought
to herself that the people of Vietnam were not just stupid but pathetic
as well. Sighing deeply, she said to her nephew:
"Who has never
made a mistake in their youth? We must forgive the foibles of the
young. Poor guy. It's heartless for them to fire him like that!".
Unlucky Stars: Quan Phu and Thdi Tue
Alas for Our People! Civilization Ruined!
Police and Police Fines
In the police station an officer escorted Red-Haired Xuan and the
old fortune-teller across an empty courtyard and over to the door of
a small ward. He turned the lock and motioned for them to enter.
"After you, Gentlemen," he said sarcastically.
Inside was a beggar together with his wife and child, a vagabond,
and a female peddler with two baskets of stale noodles and rancid
barbecue pork. The peddler sat against the wall, deep in thought,
between her two baskets. The vagabond slept on the floor, snoring
like a buzz saw. The beggar's wife and child huddled together, lov-ingly picking at each other's body lice. The door slammed shut, the
lock clicked, and the patter of police boots faded into the dis-tance... A dim light illuminated the room. Breathing heavily, the
fortune-teller placed his mat and umbrella on the floor and sat
down. Only Red-Haired Xuan remained standing. He scratched his
sides and haughtily surveyed the room and its inhabitants.
"Police station, my ass!" he exclaimed, pursing his lips. "This
jail's a snot hole. It's shameful!"
"I'm not shameful!" exclaimed the fortune-teller.
"No one's speaking to you, old man!" Xuan corrected him. "I'm
talking about our government!"
The police station disgusted him. It was a small branch office for
the city's newly created Eighteenth Precinct. Its seven officers in-cluded a French captain, a Vietnamese interpreter, an office man-ager, and four patrolmen. The sixteen streets under its jurisdiction
were located in a French neighborhood that was so peaceful and
secure that violations of the law were as rare as winning lottery
tickets. So often did the four patrolmen speed without stopping
through the sixteen streets that they grew to be talented cyclists.
One had recently won the Tour de Hanoi-Hai Phong. Others had
placed third and fourth in the Tour de Hanoi-San Tay, the Tour de
Hanoi-B~c Ninh, and the Tour de Hanoi-Hanoi. On those rare occa-sions when a peddler, a household servant, a cook, a rickshaw coo-lie, or a beggar did break a law-typically by pissing in the gutters or
fighting in the streets-the patrolmen were never around. Since two
were needed at all times to staff the station, there were only two left
over to patrol all sixteen streets, and patrolling had become little
more than training for bicycle races.
In response to the economic crisis and mounting budget deficit,
the Financial and Economic Congress of Indochina ordered the vari-ous police headquarters in the city to collect a minimum of 40,000
piasters in fines; this station owed 5,000 piasters. The figure worried
the French captain. He knew that only the lowliest Annamese-servants, cooks, rickshaw coolies, and street singers-were ticketed
in his precinct. How could the station collect 5,000 piasters from such
a pathetic collectivity? After mulling the problem over for several
days, he came up with a brilliant plan. The next day all employees of
the station were ordered to move their families to the sixteen streets.
Over the next several weeks the French captain was fined for letting
his dog run in the street. His wife was fined for lax management of
her servant's house sweeping. Fines were also collected from the
interpreter, the office manager, the four patrolmen, the errand boy,
and the gardener. Their crimes included relieving themselves out-side, cycling without a light, quarreling in public, poor household
hygiene, etc...  They fined one another with a vengeance.
As the French captain was busy typing up some paperwork, a
patrolman entered the office and reported a burglary at a nearby
French residence. It had occurred the previous night but was only
recently detected. The news annoyed the captain.
"Burglaries must be investigated at court," he said in French.
"That means no fine for us."
Nevertheless, he left for the crime scene with the interpreter,
leaving the office manager in charge of the station.
The office manager yawned like a merchant in the midst of a
recession.
"Hey, Officer Min da!"l he called out glumly. "Is this pathetic or
what?"
Officer Min dCY nodded gravely like a drunk and despondent
Confucian scholar.
"Very pathetic! It's so pathetic it kills me!"
"We're being fined to death!" the office manager blurted out.
"It's unbearable!"
"I know the public budget is short of money and everything,
but... "
"Our sixteen streets need more Annamese."
"Don't you miss the old days, say, ten years ago?"
"Very much so! Ten years ago our people were still stupid."
"Everyone is so civilized nowadays! It's a damn shame! The
streets used to be filled with depraved, uncouth men and women-people who'd spit and piss wherever they pleased, people who'd
beat each other up in public. Remember the days when four people
rode together on a single bicycle!? Remember when people used to
curse each other in public and smack their neighbors around?
Houses were filthy with toilet water; dogs ran wild in the streets.
Bicycles without headlights were everywhere. Now everything has
changed. Alas, the good old days of our parents are gone forever!"
"Even rickshaw coolies obey the law, nowadays! They never for-get their lights! They never stop in the middle of the road! No one
even curses anyone's ancestors anymore! The old order has broken
down completely! Kids today don't even know how to talk dirty!
They're all so prim and proper. They don't climb trees; they don't
play football in the middle of the road; they don't do anything!"
"It's the newspapers. That's the problem!"
"Exactly. The newspapers have civilized everyone. There's no one
left to fine."
"Except us!"
"It's not right! It's inexcusable! We're the police, for Heaven's
sake!"
"I'm an officer manager! That's even worse, damn it! If not for the
occasional bicycle race, my life would be an utter failure!"
"Can you imagine if our pictures did not appear, from time to
time, on the front of the sports pages!?"
"Are you racing in the Tour de Hanoi-Ha Dong next Sunday?"
"Of course I am! After patrolling our sixteen streets four times a
day without stopping to write a single ticket... I've never been in
better shape. It would be a waste not to compete! But we've got to
stop ticketing each other's families. Five thousand piasters! It's just
not fair."
The office manager stood up and wagged his finger at Patrolman
Min dO'.
"You cannot disobey an order, officer! Look at the wife of the
French captain. We fined her twenty piasters last month, and she
didn't utter a peep."
"If that's the case, then I must divorce my wife!"
"Oh no! Why so?"
"I told her not to keep the house so clean and to let the toilet clog
up from time to time. I ordered her to let the children throw litter in
the street-anything so that Patrolman Min toa could ticket her,
which would then allow me to ticket his wife in return. But the kids
are as well behaved as little Buddhas, and the woman keeps the
house spotless. What a witch!"
The office manager saw that he had struck a nerve and tried to
change the subject. He ordered Min dO' to fetch the defendants from
the jail for questioning.
As Officer Min dO' opened the door to the ward, the fortune-teller
was scolding Red-Haired Xuan.
"See! That's what you get for being such a troublemaker. You get
arrested! For me it makes no difference because this month my
stars-Quan Phu and Thai Tue'-are unlucky anyway. They have
foretold that, sooner or later during the month, I will be spending
some time in court. For me to be arrested for something minor like
this is not so bad!"
"I don't give a damn either, you old coot! Not to brag, but I've
been arrested at least fifteen times already."
"Beating an old man is a violent offense. You could go to prison!"
"Last time they took me to the Central Police Station! Now there's
a real station. Half a dozen pistol-packing French officers with huge
mustaches and chests covered with medals! Hundreds of policemen
with white truncheons and huge chains. The ward has an iron bar
like a tiger cage and holds hundreds of people, not to mention
thousands of flies and mosquitoes! This jail is just a tiny snot hole. It
barely holds a dozen people... It's a disgrace!"
"Let's go! Let's go!" Min dO' shouted. "It's time for interrogations.
Shut your mouths and hurry up!"
Everyone stood up except the vagabond, who was snoring thun-derously. Officer Min dO' gave him a kick.
"Let me sleep!" he moaned.
"Are you getting up, or do I have to drag you by the neck?"
"Getting up, Sir!" he said sulkily.
"Move on out!"
"First, they interrupt my sleep to bring me to jail, and now they
wake me up again to release me. What a pain!"
The prisoners filed out of the cell, through the courtyard, and into
the front office.
Because Red-Haired Xuan was respectably dressed in French-style shorts, tennis shoes, and a sleeveless undershirt, the office
manager turned to him first.
"What's this guy's crime!?"
"He hit me, Your Honor," the fortune-teller blurted out.
"I did not," Xuan protested. "I was just wringing his neck!"
"He hit me hard two times, then he tried to strangle me... "
"I never hit him, and there wasn't enough time to strangle him.
He's such a crybaby... "
The manager rapped his fist on the table.
"Quiet! Quiet! I'm asking the questions here! I'll get to the bottom
of this! You! Why did you hit him?"
"He ripped me off, Sir. I gave him one hao for a fortune reading,
but his predictions were completely wrong, and he refused to give
me a refund. I only want my money back. I didn't mean to hit him."
The manager turned to the fortune-teller. "Did you read his for-tune? Did you receive one hao?"
"I gave him a discount, Your Honor. One hao is a bargain. All my
predictions were accurate, and yet he still wants his money back."
"Not true, Your Honor! He said my future looked bright, and the
next thing I knew I lost my job!"
The manager frowned at the fortune-teller. "You dare to keep his
money after a lousy prediction like that!?"
"The future is still in the future, Your Honor. It has yet to arrive. I
have studied the art of fortune-telling for ten years, and my predic-tions are rarely off the mark. And I am never completely wrong!
Please do not judge my skills, Your Honor, until you have had the
chance to sample them yourself."
The manager frowned at Red-Haired Xuan. "That sounds reason-able to me!"
"Take your own facial features for example, Your Honor," the
fortune-teller continued. "The fame and fortune quadrant looks very
good. You are a real fire breather. The length of your eyebrows indi-cates that you have many brothers, and your flabby earlobes signify
great wealth in the future!"
The manager frowned at Red-Haired Xuan one more time. "This
fortune-teller has real talent. A le! You committed the crime of hit-ting an old person! You are fined one d'Ong and eight hao! Release the
fortune-teller immediately! And, you, let me see your identity card!"
Out on the street a car pulled up in front of the station. Mrs.
Deputy Customs Officer entered the front office and smiled at the
officers, who smiled back like merchants greeting a rich customer.
Because Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer often let her dog loose, she
had been ticketed at least once on each of the precinct's sixteen
streets. To the police, in other words, she was like a regular cus-tomer of a failing business.
"What can we do for you, Madame?"
"I am here to pay a fine for this servant of mine," she replied,
pointing at Xuan. "Please release him."
The manager rubbed his hands together. "First the fine, if you
please, Madame."
"How much?"
"One d'Ong and eight hilo."
Red-Haired Xuan looked on in amazement as Officer Min dO'
wrote up a receipt.
"Great Madame," he said respectfully. "Why are you taking such
pity on me?"
"You will know soon enough... when I get you home! You have
a job already."
"See!?" the fortune-teller exclaimed. "Do you still say that I am
wrong!"
"I take it back," Xuan replied. "You are indeed a living saint! My
deepest apologies to you, Sir!"
"What did you say?" asked Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
"Madame, this fortune-teller has great powers!"
"Is that so? Please come to my house and read my fortune! My car
will take you!"
She handed over the money and grabbed the receipt. After fetch-ing his belongings from the cell, the fortune-teller followed Xuan
and Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer into her car. The office manager
saw them off at the gate. Forgetting momentarily that he was at the
police station and not the French bakery owned by his wife, he
called out after the car, "Thank you so much! Please come again!"
Son of Heaven, Son of Buddha
The Reincarnation of the Famous
Soothsayer Quy C6c Ta
A Suspicious Case
The car honked like the grunt of a wild boar. Moments later a man-servant appeared, opened both wings of the iron gate, and waved
the car into the courtyard. An electric streetlight overhanging the
outer wall of the compound illuminated a huge Western-style villa
surrounded by a massive garden of willows, hibiscus, cacti, spica
plants, terra-cotta pillars, and rows upon rows of strange flowers.
The garden excited Xuan. He sensed the beginning of a new chapter
of his life. The fortune-teller smirked and elbowed Xuan in the ribs
as if to remind him that he had recently predicted as much. Sitting
beside the placid chauffeur, Xuan dared not respond.
The car pulled up in front of a twelve-step cement stairway that
led to the front door of the house. The driver got out of the car and
opened the back door. Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer stepped out,
carrying a dog, a Japanese umbrella, and a leather purse. She was
followed by the old fortune-teller with his box, his umbrella, and his
straw mat. Xuan exited last, and the car returned to the garage. A
woman, dressed as a servant, scampered down the steps to fetch the
luggage for her mistress.
"And where is the little master? What is he doing?" asked Mrs.
Deputy Customs Officer.
"Excuse me, Mistress. He's taking a bath."
"A bath? Has he eaten?"
Without waiting for an answer, she turned back to address Miss
Three. "Miss Three! Why do you bathe him out here in the yard?
Why do you let him expose himself outside?"
"That's what he wanted. As you know, the little master cries if he
does not get what he wants."
In a giant brass tub sat an obese little boy with the face of a half-wit. Although over a meter in height, he splashed about in the water
like a three-year-old child. The ground around the tub was littered
with toys: a stuffed dog, a doll, a car, a plane, a trumpet... Mrs.
Deputy Customs Officer put down her dog.
"Taking a bath, my sweet? What a good boy! Did anyone beat you
while mother was out? Lulu! Up! Up!"
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer whistled twice. The dog sat up
unsteadily on his two hind legs and held out his front paws. He
wagged his tongue to greet the little boy in the bath. Slapping at the
water rhythmically with both hands, the boy looked at the dog and
frowned.
"No way!" he screamed.
"Here, here... Mother apologizes. Let Mother give you a kiss."
"No way!"
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer hesitated for a moment. "Go ahead
and take your bath. But come in afterwards and eat with Mother,
okay?"
"No way!"
"All right, as you wish. But if you love Mother, at least give her a
kiss."
Stark naked, the little boy stood up in the bath and kissed his
mother. But, good God! The little master was certainly not little
anymore! The scene possessed a certain bizarre fascination for the
onlookers; it was at least as interesting as a pornographic photo. As
the "uncouth" servants frequently observed, the boy's "equipment"
was already in working order.
"That boy is the Son of Heaven, the Son of Buddha," explained
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
The fortune-teller understood this to mean that the boy had been
born only after his mother had prayed in dozens of pagodas. Xuan,
on the other hand, was flabbergasted. As soon as Mrs. Deputy Cus-
toms Officer entered the house, the little master began to scream
and sob.
"Where's Miss Three?" Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer shouted
from within the house.
The boy continued to yell.
"Little Master wants to go in! Little Master wants in!"
"Miss Three! Hurry up!" urged Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
"Dry off the Little Master and bring him inside."
Mrs. Three picked the child up and carried him into the house,
piggyback style. The enormous little master gyrated up and down as
if riding a horse.
"Gitty-up! Gitty-up! Gitty-up!"
Xuan was so disgusted he could hardly bear it.
"God-damned brat," he murmured to himself.
Xuan and the fortune-teller entered the living room. Mrs. Deputy
Customs Officer pointed them toward the sofa. "Sit here and wait
for me."
She left into the next room.
While they waited, the gigantic little boy appeared at the door
wearing a shirt but no pants. He poked his head in and out of the
door and giggled to himself like an imbecile. His silk shirt, the color
of chicken fat, displayed large red insignias on both sides that were
supposed to ward off evil spirits. Around his neck was a thick gold
choker on which hung a small pendant and a huge gold medallion.
The plaintive wail of Miss Three echoed from the other room:
"Master Blessing! Master Blessing! Please put on your pants!"
"Noway!"
"Put on your pants, or the guests will laugh at you."
"Make them play with me!"
"Yes, yes... But put your pants on first."
"Noway."
"That kid really is a gift from heaven!" said the fortune-teller
furtively.
Xuan nodded in agreement.
"But it's strange," the fortune-teller continued. "The mistress
seems like a Frenchman's wife."
"Right on," Xuan whispered, covering his mouth with his hand.
"So, why does her'gift from heaven' look so Annamese?"
Before Xuan could respond, he heard the voice of Mrs. Deputy
Customs Officer.
"My boy! My beloved boy! Put on your clothes. Be a good
boy... "
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer entered the living room. She had
taken off her gown, brassiere, and head-dress and had put on an
utterly transparent silk shirt and paper-thin pants. This made her
seem like a passionate adherent of nudism, while it made Xuan feel
dirty and uncouth. The old fortune-teller stood up respectfully.
"Do you tell fortunes by physiognomy or by horoscope?" she
asked.
"I do both, Great Madame."
"Which way is more accurate?"
"Horoscope."
"Fine. Do mine."
"When is your date of birth, Great Madame?"
"I'm not sure. I don't remember exactly."
"In that case I will do your physiognomy. But I'm afraid it won't
be as detailed as a horoscope."
"That's fine. Go ahead."
"Great Madame's physiognomy is quite encouraging. Of the
twelve sectors of your face, only one is of any concern-the one that
relates to your husband. You see, Great Madame, your cheekbones
are rather high."
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer frowned.
"What do you mean? What's wrong with my husbands? The dep-uty customs officer was always very good to me. And so was the
senior clerk. He was very kindhearted. Right before the senior clerk
died, he said that he still loved me. How many people are so beloved
by their husbands?"
"Yes, Great Madame. But, according to ancient tradition, multiple
husbands must be interpreted as an inauspicious sign."
"Yes, you are right. But, according to modern traditions, one can
enjoy as many husbands as one likes, as long as they are kind. Your
physiognomic skill is great."
"Your character, Great Madame, is very humane. You display
great compassion for other people."
"Your physiognomic skill is truly great."
"Your financial sector looks good. Your land sector looks even
better. The sector regarding your ancestor's tombs is very positive as
well."
"What about the sector relating to my children?"
"Also good. But a little sparse."
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer frowned. "Why so? I have two
children. My Jannette is in high school. She will graduate soon. And
little Master Blessing is growing very fast. In three months he will be
eleven. Why do you say'sparse' when I have two children?"
"Great Madame, there is an old saying:'One son counts, ten girls
don't.' According to the old teachings, daughters are worthless, no
matter how abundant. Hence, a single son must be considered
rather sparse."
"I see. One son is sparse."
"Great Madame. Do you plan to remarry?"
"Certainly not! I'm determined... I pledge on the souls of my
deputy customs officer and my senior clerk to remain a widow. Even
though I'm still very young... I vow to stay single to raise my
children."
"It is as I said, Great Madame. The sector regarding your children
is a little sparse."
"Your physiognomic skill is great. What about the fate of little
Master Blessing? Buddhas from the Perfume Pagoda have blessed
me with his presence for over ten years already. I only worry
that-"
"Great Madame. That sector is the best. I predict a life of great
leisure. He will enjoy wealth, high rank, security, and good health."
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer looked down respectfully and said
in a low voice, "I... I only worry that, as a mere earthly being, I do
not know how to please him and he will decide to return to the
heavens from where he came."
"Not to worry! Not to worry! Just look at his physiognomy! He
will live a long life. And Great Madame will have even greater
wealth thanks to him."
"Great! Great! Your physiognomic skill is exceptional, truly won-derful!"
"Great Madame. If you tell me your exact time of birth, I can
construct a horoscope chart that will show what will happen to you
every year, every month, and every day... "
"Is that so?"
"Yes, Great Madame. A horoscope chart is much more accurate
than physiognomy."
"Fine. You should leave, as it will soon be dark. Please come back
in a day or two and do a horoscope for me! Where is Miss Three?
Give him one dong for rickshaw fare. Be sure to come back for that
horoscope reading."
"Yes, yes. Great Madame, I'll be back in a day or two."
The old fortune-teller picked up his umbrella, straw mat, and box
and left.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer turned to Xuan:
"You! Do you
know what I did for you?"
The question caught Xuan off guard; he felt confused and a little
frightened.
"Great Madame, without your help, I would still be in jail."
"Yes. You should be grateful."
"Great Madame, your child will never forget that favor."
"Do not call yourself'child' to me! I am a civilized woman. I do
not discriminate. I do not distinguish between the rich and the
poor... "
"Yes, Madame."
"Are your parents still alive?"
"Madame, I lost my parents when I was small."
"Poor you! Do you have a wife? children?"
"Not yet, Madame."
"That's great! Uh... I mean that's a real shame! Anyway, these
are difficult times; you should not get married too early. Do you
know why I called you here?"
"Not yet, Madame. I'm waiting to serve you."
"I am a humane woman. I feel great compassion. And you de-serve my compassion. You were working and suddenly lost your
job. It must be terrible for you. Why were you acting so silly in
that changing room? I know that young people are often frisky, but
you must first determine whether the other person agrees or not.
Then... See?"
"I don't know what happened, Madame," Xuan said innocently.
"Suddenly they beat me, they fired me, they oppressed me... "
"Now, now. There's no need to deny what you did!"
"Deny what... Madame?"
"So, why did they fire you?"
"I really don't know. As I was preparing cotton towels for the club
members, that Western man came in, dragged me out of the dress-ing room, beat me, and scolded me."
"You weren't doing anything... ?"
Xuan contrived the most innocent expression he could muster. "I
was just plugging a hole in the changing room of the club."
"So, why didn't you protest when that Western fellow accused
you of such a crime?"
Xuan's face turned red. "Oh Madame!" he stammered. "I don't
even know what he accused me of. I don't understand French... "
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer stood dumbfounded and swal-lowed her disappointment.
She recalled her embarrassments and mistakes in the past. Ever
since she had been raped, those rare and semiconscious sensa-tions-sensations that were strange and very difficult to describe-continued to cling to her as a shadow clings to a body. Gradually,
they had become her obsession. She desired to be ravished again,
but the opportunity never arose. Instead, she had been forced to
ravish her husbands. By reading the novel The Tearful History of Kim
Anh, she learned of the existence of a provincial monk who claimed
to be a Buddha who could guarantee children for women who
prayed at his pagoda. After searching for and eventually finding the
pagoda, she was embarrassed to discover that the story was a hoax.
Although the ministrations of the monk did not pan out, she eventu-ally received a son from her second husband, Mr. Senior Clerk.
But now.
Examining Xuan's honest face, she came to the depressing realiza-tion that he had probably been falsely accused. Just as her sadness
began turning to anger, an idea suddenly popped into her head.
"Go upstairs and wait for me to take my bath. Afterwards, I will
tell you why I asked you here."
Xuan obeyed... He followed her upstairs and into another guest
room.
"Sit here and wait for me. Here, take a look at this an bum."
She left into the bathroom a few steps away from where Xuan sat.
She undressed, put on a rubber bathing cap to cover her hair, and
turned on the water. Water cascaded down from the iron shower-head. As she washed, she made conspicuously loud slapping noises
on her stomach and thighs. Getting no response, she knelt down and
peered through the keyhole of the bathroom door. Xuan was looking
attentively at the pictures in the album. He remained in his seat.
"Not again!" she thought to herself.
She finished bathing and opened the door. "Enough already. You
can go. I plan to hire you tomorrow. Tomorrow, go to the European-ization Tailor Shop and ask for Mrs. Civilization. I will put in a word
for you. You will not be jobless any longer."
"Please... "
"Enough! You are not very smart! Go away! Tomorrow you will
see. Remember, the Europeanization Tailor Shop... for women."
Red-Haired Xuan left, his heart full of hope. He was oblivious to
the fact that she momentarily despised him, just as she despised all
men who were truly moral.
The Anger of Hoqn Thu
Art for Life's Sake
The Products of Europeanization
following the instructions he had received from Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer, Red-Haired Xuan arrived in front of a modern-looking
tailor shop for women at precisely eight the next morning. He dared
not enter immediately, however, for he could not be sure if this was,
in fact, the Europeanization Tailor Shop of Mrs. Civilization. Red-Haired Xuan's limited education had endowed him with the capac-ity to make out a laundry list but not to understand the ultramodern
and largely illegible lettering favored by today's advertising design-ers. As Xuan looked on, workers were putting up a new storefront
sign. Five bizarre-looking pieces of newly painted red wood lay
drying on the pavement. One worker had propped a ladder up
against the wall. A younger man, whose rolled-up shirtsleeves indi-cated that he meant business, barked out orders and issued occa-sional rebukes. The tailor shop was remarkably swank. Three
wooden ma nO' canh imported from Europe stood poised behind its
large plate-glass window. Although they had been made to resemble
beautiful European women, the shop owner had skillfully arranged
turbans and strands of black hair on their heads so as to make them
look more Vietnamese. Each mannequin displayed a different article
of clothing. One sported a swallow-tailed coat, the kind that girls
and young women often wear to go out. Another wore a swimming
suit, the kind that girls and young women wear on the beach in
order to display the art of their bodies. A third wore lingerie, the
kind worn by powerful women so as to remind their husbands and
lovers not to forget their most sacred of masculine duties.
Xuan inched toward the five wooden letters on the pavement. Try
as he might, he was unable to make out the specific letter that each
was supposed to symbolize. There was a round one with a hole in
the middle and a strange square one with two round holes in the
middle. Even more bizarre were three triangle-shaped ones with
holes in the middle! Ever since he was six, Red-Haired Xuan's coarse
mind knew that a triangular shape with a hole in the middle could
only signify one thing-one very dirty thing. He smiled to himself.
The young man with the rolled-up sleeves began shouting at his
workers. "No! No! This one goes first! The triangle, damn it!"
"What is a triangle?" asked the worker, confusedly.
The young man scolded him again. "A triangle... with a
hole, damn it! And the triangular shape here is supposed to be the
letter A."
"But, Sir," the worker protested, "you just said that the triangular
shape is the letter U."
"You idiot! The right-side up triangle is a U. The upside-down one
is an A. What kind of craftsman are you? Don't you know anything
about art? Nail the upside-down triangle first, then put the right-side-up one after it. That's A followed by U-giving us AU-Europe
in other words. Then put up the square piece with the two holes-that's an H. Then the round piece with a hole in the middle-that's
an 0. Then another upside-down triangle-I mean another A. That
spells HOA-ization. Together, it all means Europeanization! Get it?
You guys are dumber than pigs!"
Despite the insult, Xuan was happy to have found the shop.
"Screw those god-damned letters!" he murmured to himself.
A moment later a young man appeared wearing a European hik-ing outfit. He approached the young man overseeing the design of
the storefront sign. They shook hands and greeted each other noisily
in French.
"My God! The Vietnamese common people are so backward, artis-tically speaking."
"Yes, yes, it's simply a waste of breath to talk about art with the
common people."
"Of course, but remember that you are a journalist. Your duty is
to help enhance the knowledge of the common people so that one
day they too may understand art. I, on the other hand, am an artist.
I am much too busy devoting myself to art to explain my work to
them."
"Yes, but your influence is already quite widespread, even among
ordinary folk."
"Still not enough. There is much work to be done. Ours are a lazy
people. They do not want to think deeply; they rarely try to compre-hend the vast, complicated problems that those of us in the fine arts
must confront. Of course, the more difficult a work of art is to
understand, the more valuable it is. For example, in Italy and in
Germany, I hear, those painters whose works are completely incom-prehensible are worshiped as saints. When the dictators Hitler and
Mussolini took power, they were so jealous of these artists that they
threw them in jail. I only pray that someday our artists will be good
enough to be thrown in jail as well!"
"Indeed!"
"Due to the low level of our society, we artists must take responsi-bility for the reform of women's fashions-by far the easiest genre of
fine arts to understand. Only when our society learns to enjoy the
beauty of... women's thighs, will it be able to appreciate the value
of nude paintings and thus appreciate fine art at the highest level."
"Quite right!"
"How do you like these ultramodern letters? They are my latest
creation! Aren't they unusual? The fact that the most common people
cannot understand this style of lettering only confirms its sophistica-tion. Someday I hope to craft letters that are so very, very modem that
even intellectuals cannot read them. What a victory for art!"
While eavesdropping on this conversation, Xuan caught a glimpse
of Mrs. Civilization through the storefront window. He gingerly en-tered the shop. The two young men followed him inside, still en-grossed in conversation.
"Good morning, Madame," Xuan said politely.
Mrs. Civilization nodded to Xuan and shook hands with the other
two. "Please sit down, Monsieurs. To what do we owe this visit?"
she asked the journalist. "Are subscriptions up or down these
days?"
"I've come for an important reason. Our sales are up to fifty
copies... "
She cut him off briskly and turned to Xuan.
"And what about you? What can I do for you?"
Xuan blushed and rubbed his hands together.
"If you please... please... Yesterday, the great Madame Dep-uty Customs Officer... "
Mrs. Civilization interrupted him.
"Quiet! You must refer to her as Madame Senior Clerk; otherwise,
she will be annoyed."
"Yes, Ma'am! Madame Senior Clerk told me to come here... she
said... to meet you... "
"Fine. Wait here for a moment."
Mrs. Civilization gestured to the journalist to enter the salon in-side the shop. Xuan sat down on an upholstered chair near the door.
Despite his nervousness, he took advantage of the rare opportunity
to admire those secret aspects of the gentler sex that only the Europe-anization movement dares to display openly. It was truly a party for
his eyes-provocative breasts cupped in brassieres of silk and lace,
thighs cased in sheer silk stockings and all manner of slips and
panties, each capable of provoking lust in men well into their seven-ties. Huge colorful rolls of solid and floral-patterned silk gave the
shop an especially lively ambiance. There was also a dressing room
covered on three sides by velvet drapes and another room in which
male and female tailors worked, busy as bees, before a row of sew-ing machines.
A poorly made-up middle-aged woman appeared outside the
glass window. She gazed inside for several minutes before entering
the shop. The shop owner greeted her warmly.
"Can I help you, Madame? Would you like to buy clothes or
perhaps have something made?"
The customer thought for a long while. "I want... a custom-made modern outfit."
"Of course you do," Mrs. Civilization replied glibly. "Today we
must all reform our wardrobes to keep up with fashion. The conven-
tional trends in makeup, for example, tend to make people look
older. We must replace them! As you know, Madame, one can no
longer remain ignorant of the latest fads in beauty maintenance and
hope to maintain family happiness. Nowadays, all young girls dress
in a modern way-the competition is increasingly brutal."
The woman nodded and opened her eyes wide in agreement.
"Yes! Yes! You are absolutely right! Young girls today dress even
more provocatively than wives of Westerners in the past! So mod-ern! So slutty! My god! They are so beautiful compared to me, and
my husband is obsessed by them. What am I to do?"
Her voice rose to an almost hysterical pitch. Mrs. Civilization tried
to calm her down. "Now, now! Don't get so worked up!"
"But my husband spends every night chasing after those modem
sluts! What, for Heaven's sake, can I do?"
"The answer is simple, Madame. If you can't beat them, you must
join them. You must try to dress just like them."
"Yes! Yes! I can dress like that too, of course! Who cares if people
call me an old whore! It's all your doing anyway. It all starts with you
tailors!"
Mrs. Civilization shrugged her shoulders.
"Madame, our society progresses according to the basic laws of
evolution. During this deeply reformist era everything conservative
will be eliminated! Since we opened this tailor shop, countless wives
have saved their marriages, recaptured the love of their husbands,
and reestablished the happiness of their families."
"In that case, Madame, I would like to order a custom-made outfit
right away, the most modern possible! Only, please do not charge
me too much!"
"Of course! I will be happy to suggest several new and different
styles for you... "
Mrs. Civilization drew the attention of her customer to a row of
mannequins. "See... here... The many innovative styles dis-played in our shop were all designed by well-known art students. If
you please, Madame, the sign under each mannequin explains the
meaning of the outfit it displays. For example, this one is called'Prom-ise.' A girl may wear this outfit to reassure her boyfriend that she
promises to show up for their appointment that evening. This one is
called'Win His Heart.' Men are like putty in the hands of girls who
wear this outfit. And here, of course, we have'Innocence.' This one is
for'Commanders of Internal Affairs' -housewives, in other words.
This one is called'Women's Rights,' for wives whose husbands are
afraid of them. This one, 'Resolute Faithfulness,' is for widows deter-mined to honor their late husbands and remain unmarried. This one,
'Hesitation,' is for widows who are somewhat less determined. And
here we have our newest model, finished several days ago. We have
not named it formally yet, but we are planning to call it'Conquest.' In
this outfit you should be able to stoke the passions of any man, even
your own husband!"
Conquest consisted of a transparent black blouse and pair of
pants over a set of black panties and a black co6c xe. It also exposed
the arms, deep cleavage, thighs, and legs of the beautiful wooden
woman that exhibited it. Mrs. Civilization stared at the outfit with a
look of utter satisfaction.
The customer, however, appeared unconvinced. "To wear this
outfit... well, it's just unsightly!"
At that moment the journalist and artist joined the conversation.
"It's very sightly indeed, Madame!" the journalist said. "If you
wear this outfit, men will pursue you, just as they pursue innocent
young girls!"
"Ah, Conquest!" the artist chimed in. "I chose the name, you
know."
"But such clothing barely covers anything at all," the customer
protested.
"Madame," the artist retorted, "the very concept of clothing has
changed. We developed this particular style following the concep-tual lead of famous European designers. Clothing should enhance
and embellish one's natural beauty, not cover it up. Soon clothing
will progress to that extreme, exquisite, perfect point where it will
no longer cover up anything at all."
Mrs. Civilization peered uneasily at the doubtful expression on
the face of her customer.
"It may seem too modern for you now, but just wait until the next
time your husband plans to go on one of his evening outings. As
soon as you put it on and stand before the mirror, your husband will
desire no one but you."
"Yes! Yes!" the customer nodded. "Perhaps I ought to give that
one a try."
"Madame, what is family happiness if not the happiness of hus-bands and wives? What else can be done when love begins to fade?"
"You're right! You're absolutely right!"
"We have designed new styles of undergarments for this same
reason. Never mind what those old-fashioned moralists say about
us. We do not simply reform the outside. A slip or a pair of panties
from our shop may be thought of as a secret weapon in the fight to
retain one's husband."
"Where are they? How can I order one?"
Mrs. Civilization turned around and gestured toward a glass case.
She reached in and pulled out a pile of panties, brassieres, long
slips, and mini-slips.
"I call this one'Coquette.' And these are known as'Wait-a-
Minute' panties. This is the'Happiness' slip. Here is what we call
the'Stop-Those-Hands' brassiere. Feel free to look them over. Only
the Europeanization Shop cares so much about the satisfaction of the
fair sex."
The female customer nodded her head vigorously. "Yes, I will do
as you say! I will Europeanize myself and follow the ways of civiliza-tion! I vow to dress progressively! Call your tailors and show me the
changing room!"
Mrs. Civilization pointed to the artist. "Here, Madame, is your
tailor! He was originally a student at the Indochinese Fine Art Col-lege. Your beauty is now his responsibility!"
The artist bowed his head very low. "Please follow me, Madame. I
am deeply honored to serve you."
They disappeared behind the velvet drapes of the changing room.
Xuan remained in his chair. Mrs. Civilization turned to address the
journalist.
"Monsieur, your newspaper cannot possibly propose to charge
more for advertising. The cost is excessive already."
"You are wrong, Madame. Our newspaper has more and more
readers everyday. Our prestige is constantly under attack by conser-vative forces-another clear benefit to you. More people are follow-ing the news than ever before."
"That is only natural, Monsieur. But, of course, it benefits your
business much more than mine."
"No! It benefits you and your kind as well, maybe even more!"
"It is you who calls for renovation. Hence, you benefit most when
people heed the call!"
"No! You benefit most!"
"So says you!"
"It's not true! Haven't you noticed the recent progressive evolu-tion of our society? It's all over the daily papers! So many divorces!
So many cases of adultery! Girls chasing boys, men getting bored
with their wives, officials leaving their posts to pursue modem
girls... It's great for your business. Newspapers clearly have a
huge influence. New dancing halls are popping up everyday... "
At that moment Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer entered the shop.
Red-Haired Xuan stood up. Mrs. Civilization left the journalist alone
to contemplate the influence of his newspaper.
"My niece! My niece!... "
"Auntie... Over here... I need to ask you something."
Aunt and niece huddled together in the far corner of the room. As
the journalist put on his hat and walked angrily out of the shop, he
grasped one of life's basic truths: journalism is a wretched profes-sion. Red-Haired Xuan continued to wait.
"Why did you send this guy here, Auntie?"
"I need you to hire him. I want to keep him around while they are
building the tennis court at my house. We can use him for practice."
"But the court won't be finished for a while. Why hire him now
and waste all that money?"
"You have a point. But he may starve if we don't do it now!"
She paused a moment and then whispered to her niece:
"How
about this... before the tennis court is finished, we could... in
that way, we won't waste all that much. What do you think?"
Just like that, Red-Haired Xuan became a member of the move-ment for social reform.
A Lesson in Progress for Red-Haired Xuan
Two Views about Family and Society
A Horned Husband
The clock struck twelve.
drove to a restaurant for lunch, accom-panied by several modern-looking women and a handful of students
recently returned from studies abroad. The tailors and seamstresses
also went out to eat together. Out on the street cicadas hummed in
the sapindus trees, disturbing the afternoon naps of high officials.
"What a god-damned drag," said Red-Haired Xuan to himself. He
paced back and forth, trying to commit to memory the instructions
he had received from his new boss.
"Before you help us to practice sports, we need you to assist in the
Europeanization of society. Keep in mind that from this day forward
you play an important part in the Movement for Social Reform.
From now on your efforts will determine whether our society grows
more civilized or degenerates into barbarity! Hence, you must work
hard, take your responsibilities seriously, and try to understand the
significance of what you are doing."
Seeing Xuan's blank reaction to the Master's convoluted advice,
the Mistress tried to put it more simply.
"What he means is that, if you find yourself with free time, use
this feather duster to tidy up the place. Start with the spools of silk
and then do the clothes and the mannequins. Cleanliness is impor-tant. Do not let the doorway become dusty and full of litter."
"Yes, Ma'am."
"You must also learn the names of various products and fash-ions," added the designer, "so that you can make suggestions to
customers regarding guf"
"Yes, Sir. But what is gu?"
The designer tapped his brow, searching for the right words. "It
means... It means a certain liking or a taste," he stammered. "It is
a specific concept about fine art."
"I still don't get it, Sir."
"Try to understand! In order to please the customers' ears, you
must remember all the names. This is the duty of the vang dcr. Every
time someone buys a new modern outfit, our country will have
another progressive person."
"Sir, do I also need to know the different kinds of silk-and how
to match certain fabrics with certain kinds of ladies?"
The designer opened his eyes wide and stuck his finger in Xuan's
face. "Of course not! That's too much to expect from the likes of you.
Only French tay 0' like me can be trusted to carry out such a sacred
duty! This is my work! Mine! Here, come with me... "
The designer dragged Xuan over to a mannequin. "Sleeveless and
neckless means Puberty! Say it aloud!"
Xuan repeated after him like a parrot cramming for an exam.
"Sleeveless and neckless means Puberty! Sleeveless and neckless
means Puberty!"
The designer nodded and directed Xuan to another mannequin.
"Strapless, showing the top half of the breasts means Innocence!
Repeat after me."
"Strapless, showing the top half of the breasts means Innocence!
Strapless, showing the top half of the breasts means Innocence!"
Red-Haired Xuan repeated it again and again.
"Very good! If you learn these by heart, you should be able eventu-ally to recognize the lettering on the signs. Soon you will know
every style ever devised by the fine art of fashion design. From now
l. G6ul (taste).
on the Europeanization Movement will hinge on your intelligent
mind, so pay attention. This outfit, Resolute Faithfulness, is for
widows determined not to remarry. Hence, neither the top nor the
bottom is especially revealing; the collar is like a lotus leaf, draped
over the bulging outlines of the breasts. With Hesitation, on the
other hand, the collar is designed to cover one side of the breast and
reveal the other. Can you read these labels?"
"Yes Sir, I know how to read the old-style lettering."
"Good. In that case I'll leave you to go over them by yourself."
"Don't forget to hang the Closed at Noon sign in front of the glass
window," Mrs. Civilization added. "You will stay here and mind the
shop. If anyone comes, greet them and try to remember what they
ask for so you can tell me later."
With that, they left the shop.
The designer's comments confirmed to Red-Haired Xuan that he
was no more than an errand boy in the Europeanization Movement
for Social Reform. While this fact did not disturb him, he was miffed
that no one remembered that errand boys need lunch and an after-noon rest like other people. He was starving, in fact. He had hoped
to meet Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer, but she had driven away long
ago with her beloved dog.
In the now quiet and empty shop he paced back and forth, mur-muring to himself. "What a god-daIIU1ed pain in the-!"
He began dusting off the mannequins. Like a child studying Chi-nese characters by heart, Xuan read each label several times out loud
to himself.
"God-daIIU these clothes! What the hell is this one? Promise,
huh? Tight waist, wide at the chest and ass... got it! Tight waist,
wide chest and ass is Promise! Breasts, arms, and thighs exposed-Conquest! Breasts, arms, and thighs exposed-Conquest! Strapless,
showing the top half of the breasts, is Innocence!"
Xuan dropped the feather duster and bent down to pick it up.
"Strapless, showing the top half of the breasts, is Innocence!
Strapless... strapless... is Innocence!"
At that moment a young woman pushed open the door and en-tered the shop. She stared at Xuan in surprise. "Who are you?"
Red-Haired Xuan hid the feather duster behind his back. "Me? I
am... I am... a member of the Europeanization Movement," he
said solemnly.
"I see!"
"I am a social reformer... the future of our nation lies in my
hands."
"Ah yes, very good!"
"What can I do for you, Miss? A pair of Wait-a-Minute panties
perhaps?"
"I'm sorry, but I can't wait a minute. You see, I'm married already."
"Then what do you want, Madame?"
"I want my husband! I want reform! I want Europeanization! Do
you know where my husband is?"
"Who is he, Madame?"
"Mr. ILL...
"Who?"
"Mr. ILL!"
Red-Haired Xuan stood frozen in place, as wooden looking as the
mannequins.
"Mr... Mr. ILL?"
"Yes! Right. Where is he?"
"There is no Mr. ILL here!"
"But, there is. He is a tailor known as Mr. Indochinese Fine Arts.
As a columnist for the women's newspapers, he uses the pen name
Mr. ILL-it stands for'I Love Ladies!' All social reformers know of
him. Since when did you start to reform?"
"Ah, ah, yes, of course! He just stepped out.
"I'll wait for him."
"Yes, please relax, Madame. As you wish."
"Please tell me what you think, Monsieur. Does my outfit seem at
all modern to you?"
Red-Haired Xuan glanced at her simple do dili. Her collar was not
shaped like a lotus leaf. Her white pants were plain and unrevealing.
Her unpretentious shoes were made of black velvet. Given his re-cent realization that the most modern clothes were the ones that
looked the most absurd, her outfit seemed rather old-fashioned.
"Madame, you look honest and proper only. There appears to be
little modem about you."
"Say it isn't so, Monsieur!"
Xuan nodded insistently.
"Very old-fashioned, in fact, not Europeanized at all! The outfit
seems especially dated for the wife of Mr. ILL... Don't you know
that your husband has designed many of the newest and most ele-gant styles? Innocence, Conquest, Hesitation, Wait-a-Minute, Co-quette, Stop-Those-Hands... "
The woman ground her teeth together. "My husband oppresses
me. I can't bear it any longer!"
"Madame, that is truly a roadblock on the road of evolution! Your
only course of action is to order the outfit known as Women's
Rights. It is guaranteed to strike fear into the heart of your hus-band... Civilization has said as much!"
"You are a highly educated man. You speak as eloquently as
French literature! Please help me get through this Europeanization
Movement!"
Red-Haired Xuan bowed low.
"I am deeply honored to serve you."
The woman smiled.
"What a refined gentleman!"
"Madame, what is family happiness if not the happiness of hus-bands and wives? What else can be done when love begins to fade?"
"You're right! If Mr. ILL continues to place restrictions on me, I
may not be able to love him as when we were newly married."
"Madame, never mind what those old-fashioned moralists say;
we do not only'reform the outside.' Our society progresses accord-ing to the basic laws of evolution... During this deeply reformist
era, everything conservative will be eliminated... Clothing should
embellish one's natural beauty, not cover it up... "
Just as Red-Haired Xuan's speaking machine was shifting into
high gear, the door to the shop swung open and the designer ran in,
followed by the journalist. The designer raised his arms up over his
head. "Oh! Our customs and morals have deteriorated so!"
He turned and gesticulated wildly at the journalist, who was busy
thinking of how the designer was probably jealous because his wife
was speaking to Red-Haired Xuan. (Artists are often jealous.) "You
are right. It is truly unforgivable!"
"Don't you see what I mean? My wife? My own wife? My own
wife dresses in the new modern way? My God! White pants? My
God! Hair parted on the side and heart-shaped lipstick? Oh my god!
What a slut! What a loose woman! What a-"
Red-Haired Xuan raised his hand to interrupt. "Sir, permit me to
offer a defense of the gentler sex within the Europeanization Move-ment!"
The designer's wife started to grow angry. "Stop being so stupid!
You call for renovation! You campaign for Europeanization! You de-mand that women reform themselves according to your wishes, to
make themselves up following your methods! What about me? Yes, I
am your wife, but I am also a woman! Everyone can see that I am a
woman! Does anyone dare to say otherwise? Do any of you dare to
say that I am not a woman?"
"We know, we know... Now shut up and stop misbehaving,"
said the designer.
He gestured for her to be quiet.
"I won't shut up! You can't make me!"
"Shut up, you idiot! Don't you know that there are different kinds
of women? When we campaign for the reform of women, we mean
other people's wives and sisters, not our own! Don't you under-stand? It's one thing for other women to reform, but you're my wife.
Of course, I would never permit you to become one of those modern
women!"
"But that's not fair," Mrs. ILL protested.
The designer turned to the journalist for help.
"Madame, we must make a distinction between our families and
our society."
"Then why do you also advocate reform in your newspaper?"
"As your husband has explained already, when we speak about
women, we mean the wives and sisters of other people, not our own
wives and sisters. My family follows the old traditions. Our women
cannot be allowed to wear modern clothes or to go dancing one day
and to some festival the next. At home they must never be allowed
to employ theories of liberation and equal rights to challenge the
authority of their mothers-in-law."
The journalist's oh-so-progressive words inspired the designer.
"In my opinion, certain women ought to be confined to their
rooms, get it?"
"Oh my god! You can't mean it!?" screamed the designer's wife.
"What is so difficult to understand?" replied the journalist, raising
his two hands.
"What an ill-behaved woman!" added the designer bitterly. "Every-
thing is so simple for your kind. You demand one fashion today and a
different one the next! What a waste! You are nothing more than a
parasite! After you squander all of your miserable husband's money
on new clothes, what will you do when another outfit strikes your
fancy? Prostitute yourself? Don't be such a copycat! Don't be such a
slut!"
The designer thrust his finger into Xuan's face. "I caught you in
the act! You were trying to corrupt my wife, to lead her astray with
your silver tongue! You are trying to destroy my family! Watch out! I
warn you... "
He grabbed his wife by the arm and dragged her to the door.
"Hurry home!" he scowled. "Go home and take off those white
pants, immediately! Go now, or I will divorce you!"
The journalist grabbed his briefcase and followed the couple out
of the shop.
Alone in the shop, Red-Haired Xuan was overcome with confu-sion. He simply could not follow the logic of the reform-minded
tailor. Just as he began to wonder if his altercation with the designer
might cost him his new job, an elegantly dressed middle-aged clerk
entered the shop. He addressed Xuan in a low whisper. "Sir! Sir, I
have sprouted horns on my head."
Red-Haired Xuan rubbed his eyes to check if he might be dream-ing.
The man spoke to him again. "Yes, it's true. I am a horned
husband."
"Do you really have horns?" asked Xuan fearfully.
"Yes, it's true."
Red-Haired Xuan reached out to touch the man's head. "You
must be joking. I don't feel any horns."
"Sir, I am speaking figuratively. What I mean is that my wife has
slept with another man!"
"No kidding!"
"It's true. According to the French, husbands such as I are known
as horned husbands. My wife is so immoral. I just want to kill
myself!"
"Right now?"
"But I must do something glorious first, and for that I will need
your help."
"But I don't even know who you are, Sir."
"I am a senior clerk at the post office. That is all you need to know.
I am also a relative of Mr. Civilization. I was told by Mrs. Deputy
Customs Officer that you are intelligent, educated, and generous. I
have stopped by on my way to work to ask for your assistance."
"What can I do?"
"Very little, Sir, I promise. The next time you see me-and it will
be soon, I assure you-point to my face and say:'Sir, you have
sprouted horns.' That is all."
"I don't know if I dare. Why must you draw attention to your
horns in such an obvious way?"
"I beg of you. Help me, and I will pay you ten piasters! Here is an
advance of five piasters."
The man slipped a five piaster note into Xuan's hand and moving
furtively-as all horned husbands tend to do-he left the shop.
Tennis Court Problems Again
Life in a Civilized Family
Red-Haired Xuan Leaps into Science
Three people stood at the window peering down into the yard.
"See what I mean!" exclaimed Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
"Three workers and almost nothing has been done! God only knows
when the tennis court will be finished!"
"Calm down, Auntie," said Mr. Civilization. "You can't build a
tennis court overnight."
"There's no hurry," added Mrs. Civilization. "We can start practic-ing as soon as it's done."
The tennis court was being made from fragments of brick and
several layers of bich toong. The hard rectangular surface was sur-rounded by dug-up lemon trees, rose bushes, and piles of grass and
weeds. In addition to her newfound passion for sports, there was
another reason why Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer had ordered her
flower garden dug up and replaced by a tennis court. But it was a
reason known only to God.
"Almost eight hundred piasters for a tennis court. Is that a good
price?"
"It seems reasonable to me, Auntie," Mrs. Civilization said reassur-ingly. "Most sports clubs hold dozens of fund-raisers before they can
build a single court. Eight-hundred seems like a decent price."
Because he assumed that Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was
building the court out of passion for sports, on the one hand, and
love for her niece-his wife-on the other, Mr. Civilization felt
compelled to reassure her as well. "So what if it's a little expen-sive. This court might change your life. Perhaps your house will
become like a club-a meeting place where upper-class intellectuals
gather together to improve and help civilize our society! It will not
only enhance your reputation, Auntie, but it will improve the fu-ture prospects of little brother Blessing. Children today need a
variety of civilizing influences. They need physical instruction as
well as spiritual guidance. In the past our elders focused exclu-sively on the cultivation of the mind-a serious mistake in my
opinion."
He spoke elegantly, fluently, and, for someone who didn't actu-ally believe what he was saying, with great conviction. Although
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer failed to grasp his point, she was
pleased because it sounded, at least, like they were of the same
mind. But why in the world did he think that her tennis court would
help civilize the society?
They returned to the living room.
"That Xuan seems pretty efficient, huh?" said Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer.
"He is very intelligent, indeed!" her niece replied. "He is already a
big hit among our customers."
"He is blessed with good luck!" said Mrs. Deputy Customs Offi-cer. "Joy and prosperity blossom wherever he goes."
"I think you are right! Since he started with us, our sales are way up."
"He is well spoken and quick on his feet, too," her nephew-in-law
added.
"Some people are cursed with bad luck, but fortune follows him
wherever he goes. It must be fate. Too bad he was orphaned as a
child. With a bit of schooling, he could be an educated person."
"I couldn't disagree more," Mr. Civilization protested. "What
does he have to complain about? Ball boys and tailor's assistants can
also contribute to social progress! Moreover, if he ever makes a name
for himself, being an orphan will only enhance his reputation! Who
cares if the son of a rich mandarin gains fame and fortune? He ought
to be proud to be a member of the common people; they are re-spected the world over! The aristocracy and the bourgeois are out
nowadays, and the common people are in. Hooray for the common
people! Long live the common people!"
The more he spoke, the more Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer
found her nephew-in-law to be civilized, up-to-date, and more than
deserving of the exalted title foreign exchange student, even though
he had never earned the diploma. She yawned and hugged Lulu in a
passionate embrace. "Where is everyone? They said they would
come over today."
Mr. Civilization leaned back in his chair and looked up at the
ceiling. He put the eighteenth Ang-le cigarette of the day into his
mouth and struck a match. Being a fashionable woman, his wife put
both of her feet up on the low coffee table.
"Where is everyone this afternoon?" she repeated.
"Some of my friends may come over later today."
"Whom do you mean, my dear?"
"The new group or the older one?" asked Mrs. Deputy Customs
Officer.
"Just a couple of friends-Dr. Straight Talk, Joseph Thit, maybe
several others."
"Really!"
"I think you've met them before, Auntie. They plan to make a
courtesy call."
"Very good!" Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer replied.
She buzzed for the cook, who entered promptly.
"Go buy ice for drinks!" she ordered. "Open wide the main en-trance! Chain the dogs. Hurry up!"
Gusts from the ceiling fan rustled the cigarette paper-thin clothes
covering the white skin of the two fashionable ladies. The ticking of
the clock drew attention to the silence in the room. Looking like the
soul of Vietnam on the road of evolution and liberation, Mrs. Dep-uty Customs Officer hugged her French puppy and gazed up dream-ily at the ceiling fan. , on the other hand,
looked worn-out from the crushing burdens of pursuing life's four
essential pleasures (eating, sleeping, making love, and going to the
toilet) in a civilized way and promoting populism.
The doorbell rang out, jolting the hostess from her chair. Moments
later, an old man entered the room. The Civilizations stood up, and
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer offered a warm greeting. "Welcome!
What a surprise and honor that you have stopped by to visit us,
Grandpa H6ng."
Before he could reply, Grandpa H6ng was seized by a fit of violent
coughing. It sounded as if he were choking on a water pipe. Al-though it was the middle of summer, he wore a padded coat and
heavy leather shoes. He smelled of peppermint oil and wore several
medals pinned to his chest.
Mr. Civilization looked uneasily at his wife, embarrassed at the
fact that Grandpa H6ng was his father. In the past he had been a
senior clerk-an exemplary official and loyal citizen of the protector-ate. He was also a kind-hearted father who feared and slavishly
indulged his spoiled children. Following retirement, the state ac-knowledged his thirty years of service to the king and the country by
awarding him the H6ng Lo T,t Thie'u Khanh medaJ. Like many
Vietnamese of the era, he was also an opium addict.
Grandpa H6ng's only ambition in life was to become a great-grandpa. In pursuit of this worthy goal, he contrived to behave like
an old man on his last legs, although in truth he was no more than
fifty. Whenever he went out, he wore a heavy ba dir xuy, whether it
was winter or not. To advertise his senility, he coughed uncon-trollably during rickshaw rides and always made a point to miscalcu-late the fare. If anyone tried to speak with him while he was prepar-ing his opium, he would close his eyes, frown, and say:
"I know! I
know! What a pain! Shut up, already!" He said this as a matter of
principle, even as he listened attentively.
As with many rich people who squandered money for their chil-dren to "study" in France, Grandpa H6ng respected his son and
offered up stories about him as if he were serving an elegant det-se.s
While disappointed that his son had returned home without a di-ploma, he was reassured by the argument that "education does not
come from a diploma. If it did, then even Ph<;i.m Quynh and Nguy~n
Viin VInh are uneducated." He was also thrilled that his son had
become a revolutionary within the prevailing legal framework. This
allowed Mr. Civilization to radically reform society without being
jailed or executed. He was especially proud that his son had not
become one of those silly revolutionaries who aspires to bring happi-ness to the people without teaching them about dancing or ultra-modern clothes. Like many old and stupid people, Grandpa H6ng
did not allow his utter ignorance of civilization to prevent him from
supporting its merits wholeheartedly. Just as he was faithful to Great
France, Grandpa H6ng was fiercely loyal to his son, a fidelity he
demonstrated by adopting all of his son's many foreign affectations,
such as using the pronouns toa and moa.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer offered her arm to Grandpa H6ng.
With her assistance, he took his seat-but gingerly, like a genuine
great-grandpa.
"When did toa arrive here?" he asked his son.
"A while ago," Mr. Civilization answered, as if not addressing
anyone in particular.
"Moa has some business with toa. Our via seems on the verge
of... going... of leaving us. Perhaps we ought to find a medical
doctor so that old via can enjoy a little French science before he
dies... "
"Just how sick is Great-Grandpa?" Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer
asked.
Grandpa H6ng coughed for several moments. "It's very serious!
He's over eighty years old, you know."
"To live this long seems a violation of Heaven's will," Mrs. Civili-zation said angrily.
"I had hoped that the old man would have passed on already,"
Grandpa H6ng explained apologetically. "The sooner, the better.
Why continue living when you can no longer eat or sleep and all you
can do is whine and wet the bed? It will also be a sign of bad luck for
our family if I die before the old man. If, on the other hand, he dies
first, I will be able to stage a lavish and solemn funeral for a huge
number of guests."
"Then, why call a doctor?" Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer asked,
stifling a nervous giggle.
"We must call one. Better that the old man dies because of a doctor
than because of a lack of medicine. Anyway, we will try to find one of
those doctors who is more likely to kill him than cure him."
"In that case there is no point looking for an accomplished doc-tor," Mr. Civilization said in a loud and dignified voice.
"Indeed. Any quack will do just fine," Grandpa H6ng added.
"Does toa know of any really second-rate doctors among your old
friends?"
Mr. Civilization sat down and scratched his head pensively as if
planning some sort of high-tech assassination. "Moa has a friend
who opened a clinic two years ago. He returned home on the same
ship with moa. I hear that many people have died under his care.
One patient who came to him with a small pimple on his chin died
after he treated it with Chinese herbs. His reputation for quackery is
unrivaled."
"Isn't he the one who tried to deflower one of his female pa-tients... ?" asked Mrs. Civilization.
"That's right," Mr. Civilization nodded.
"Who is he, again? What was his name?" Mrs. Deputy Customs
Officer asked with sudden interest.
Grandpa H6ng ignored the question.
"We only need an unscrupulous doctor-someone who neglects
his patients or perhaps... overmedicates them. That should be
enough for the via."
"Great-Grandpa is well over eighty," put in Mrs. Deputy Customs
Officer. "Maybe the answer is to call a pediatrician. Or we could get
an optometrist for his stomach aches or a V.D. specialist for his
asthma."
She paused for a moment. "I guess there's no point getting that
deflowerer for a sick old man."
Grandpa H6ng frowned. "The problem, of course, is that it's not
clear that the old man actually has any illness."
"Father," Mrs. Civilization began respectfully. "We must be very
careful here. What if we get a cardiologist and the old man turns out
to really have a heart problem?"
At that moment Red-Haired Xuan timidly entered the room. He
was barely acknowledged and sat down beside a large mirror, where
he could stare admiringly at his European-style suit. He had bought
it with the five piasters given him by the senior postal clerk.
"Long live homed husbands!" he thought merrily to himself.
"Horns for everybody!"
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer turned to Grandpa H6ng. "Alright,
so Great-Grandpa has no reported illnesses, but he must have some
pains... or a little discomfort at least!"
"A Jot!" responded Grandpa Hbng. "He coughs, spits, and "W"hines
all day and night! Sometimes he complains of stomach pains."
At that Red-Haired Xuan entered the conversation. "Does the
patient ever have trouble breathing?" he asked. "Does he ever seem
congested?"
"Sometimes, yes," Grandpa H6ng replied.
"It sounds like asthma. A little ambergris should clear that up."
"But what about his stomach pains?"
"The patient has two diseases," Xuan replied, sounding like a real
herbalist. "He is doubtless very old. His stomach aches come from
poor blood circulation that prevents him from digesting his food. It
could also derive from too many vapors in the sperm following
sexual intercourse. Of course, sometimes such pain is merely psycho-somatic. There are also cases in which the pain migrates from the
patient's stomach to his spine. Do you know if his pain is greater
before he eats or afterwards?"
"Afterwards, I think."
"I see. In that case his intestines probably lack sour fluids. People
short of sour fluids typically hurt when they are full. Those with an
abundance of sour fluids tend to hurt when they are hungry."
Red-Haired Xuan rattled on like a well-oiled diagnostic machine.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer and  listened
in stunned silence. How strange! How utterly unexpected!
"Sir, where did you develop such an extensive medical knowl-edge?" Grandpa H6ng asked respectfully.
Before he could respond, Mr. Civilization cut him off. "This is a
friend of mine-a student from the medical school. I forgot to intro-duce him to you, father."
How unexpected, indeed!
How could Xuan have guessed the benefit he was to derive from an
old part-time job for which he was paid to sit on the hood of a car,
made up as Charlot, and bark out advertisements over a loudspeaker
for herbal medicine manufactured by the self-proclaimed Cochin-chinese King of Venereal Disease Treatment. It was from this humble
origin that Xuan set off on the road to science, status, and prosperity.
A Living Person's Will
A Scientific Debate
Love-What Else Are You Waiting For?
Reclining atop an ornate ebony bed encrusted with mother-of-
pearl, Grandpa H6ng closed his eyes. To his right lay an opium tray;
to his left, a rickshaw coolie. Grandma sat at his feet. The rickshaw
coolie wiped off his hooves, readying himself for the heavy responsi-bilities of preparing and serving opium.
"I will invite the herbalist," Grandma said.
Grandpa H6ng frowned and snapped at his wife for the tenth
time that evening. "I know! I know! What a pain! Shut up, already!"
Grandma ignored him. "We should also start making funeral
arrangements... "
"I know! I know! What a pain! Shut up, already!"
"I think we should have a combination of traditional and modern
rites. Let's have a mourning flag, a paper and bamboo house for the
ritual offering, a Chinese bugle, a sedan coffin, and several dozen
banners with parallel verse. We can also have a Western trumpet to
please the children, but I insist that we include the older rites as well."
"I know! I know! What a pain! Shut up, already!"
Grandma held her tongue. After several moments Grandpa could
not bear her silence any longer. "What else, Grandma?"
The rickshaw puller ignored this all-too-familiar exchange.
Grandma continued to list all the complicated rites she wanted. And
Grandpa continued to retch. As usual, the complexity of the funeral
arrangements and the anxiety over how they would be perceived
overwhelmed any sentimental meaning invested in the event. Out-side in the living room, far from the ornate ebony bed, a small group
of guests gathered including friends and relatives of the Civilizations.
Each of them had already ascended the stairs, entered the room
where Great-Grandpa lay, lifted the mosquito net, and peeked inside.
Then, with their duty complete, they rushed downstairs to drink tea,
smoke, and exchange bits of gossip-all the time contemplating the
percentage of the old man's fortune they were due upon his death.
Although the old man was only moderately sick, he was now referred
to in the past tense.
By this time Mr. ILL was busy designing several ultramodern
mourning outfits. The journalist was preparing an obituary, a fu-neral notice, and photos for the newspaper. Mrs. Civilization was
imagining how she might look in all-white mourning clothes, a fash-ion opportunity that she had been dreaming of for some time. Mr.
Civilization sat, smoking his Ang-le cigarettes, thinking of the prop-erty he was to inherit when the old man finally bit the dust. With the
help of his lawyer, the old man had prepared a will, which stipu-lated that the profit derived from the several dozen houses that he
owned would be split among his children and grandchildren, but
only after he died. He was blissfully unaware that this will had only
enhanced a powerful desire among his children and grandchildren
for his demise. In the past he had made his fortune with his bare
hands. He had worked his entire life for his family, and now death
had become his final filial obligation.
Young Mr. Tan tinkered busily with several cameras, trying to
decide which one to use during the funeral. Everyone called him
Tan the High School Graduate, not because he had graduated from
high school but because he had failed the graduation exam on three
separate occasions. Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was holding her
sacred son like a gentle mother. Mr. Joseph Thie't, a close friend of
Mr. Civilization, was contemplating starting up a royalist newspa-per, not for the imperial court in Hue' but for Mr. Leon Oaudet and
the Orleans family in France. He viewed the upcoming funeral as an
opportunity to boast about his past exploits.
"I remember when Monsieur Banville passed away," he began. "It
seemed that half of Paris turned out for his funeral, including all the
right-wing parties. Back then, I was a member of the Th~p h,r
L{:ral... "
But no one listened to him. They were much too busy listening to
Mr. ILL.
"The funeral clothes must be made from white Shanghai crepe
with a black border. The collar will be rose shaped-white petals
with black trim! The same goes for the mourning cap! White with
black trim looks better than black with white trim."
"It's going to look gorgeous!" exclaimed Mrs. Deputy Customs
Officer. "It makes you look forward to funerals!"
Little Master Blessing was less impressed. "No way!"
Mrs. Civilization clapped her elegant hands together.
"Very good! Derniere creation!"
Only the homed senior clerk was silent. There was still no sign of
his wife. His eyes welled up with hatred. He looked around for
Xuan but could not find him either.
"Where is Mr. Xuan?" he asked Mr. Civilization.
"He's getting some medicine. He should be back soon."
The discussion turned to the question of which profession and
position ought to be printed in the obituary. As the debate heated
up, Miss Snow-Grandpa H'Ong's eighteen-year-old baby daugh-ter-entered the room. She was beautiful and possessed a frivolous
romantic quality that was fashionable for the time.
"I've come from the homes of two different herbalists/' she an-nounced, "but I didn't meet either of them. I left messages for them
to come over as soon as they can."
"Damn it!" screamed Grandma from somewhere in the room.
"You silly child! They will never forgive our family if you invite two
at the same time!"
"Why, for Heaven's sake, did you invite two herbalists?" Mr.
Civilization added angrily. "I said that we should wait for Mr. Xuan
to bring back the sacred medicine from the Bia Pagoda... "
"My God!" interjected Joseph Thie't. "If toa relies on medicine
from the Bia Pagoda, then toa is truly crazy!"
"Toi doesn't understand! Nothing is more important than the pa-
tient's belief in the medicine. Haven't toi heard about the healing
powers of positive thinking? Only faith can cure. And moi's old man
has great faith in the sacred medicine of the Bia Pagoda... "
"But I thought the old man was being treated by Mr. Xuan, a
student from the medical college!"
"Indeed, he is," explained Mr. Civilization. "The old man has
spoken with Mr. Xuan and appears to respect him deeply. He has
great faith in him. It seems that Mr. Xuan also believes in the healing
powers of the sacred medicine from the Bia Pagoda. How can moa
old man not recover? Such concentrated faith is enough to empower
any quack."
"It makes sense to me," said Joseph Thie"t, not aware of his
friend's ulterior motives.
Mr. Civilization continued to attack his younger sister. "Who gave
you permission to invite those two herbalists, little girl?"
"It was Mother," she protested. "I only did what Mother told me
to do."
Mr. Civilization ran into the other room, looking for his mother.
"Oh, no!" he moaned under his breath. "What a pain! A little
medicine is usually all you need to do a patient in. But too many
cooks may spoil the soup! Don't you know that saying, Mother?"
Grandma, who was still worried about the arrival of the two rival
herbalists, offered a suggestion. "Perhaps we should let each doctor
prescribe something."
"I know! I know! What a pain! Shut up, already!" Grandpa
snapped.
"Otherwise," Grandma continued, "they will be angry and refuse
to come over when someone is really sick."
Amid all this chaos Red-Haired Xuan entered with a vial of filthy
water tucked under his arm and a bundle of strange leaves in his
hand. His eyes fell on the senior clerk, which triggered thoughts of
his new European suit, which in turn prompted him to appreciate
the importance of always trying to meet one's obligations. He
cleared his throat to draw attention to himself.
"Sir," he said, pointing at the senior clerk, "you seem to h-."
But before he could finish the horned clerk gestured for him to
hold off.
The guests greeted Xuan like a returning prince. They gathered
around him and asked about his trip to the Bia Pagoda. Miss Snow
and her innocent-looking eyes were especially attentive to Xuan,
having heard from her brother that he was a student from the medi-cal college.
"Ladies and gentlemen," said Mr. Civilization with both his eyes
and Adam's apple bulging, "you are all invited upstairs to witness
the administration of the sacred medicine."
As the assembled crowd headed toward the stairs, two elderly
herbalists-;-Dr. Spleen and Dr. Lung-entered the front door almost
simultaneously. They were followed by two rickshaw drivers, des-perately trying to collect their fares. Miss Snow emerged from the
crowd and gave them each several bills. Grandpa H6ng began shep-herding the rest of the crowd upstairs.
At that moment there were only two people tending to Great-Grandpa: Mr. Two and his daughter Miss Moon. Although Mr. Two
was Grandpa H6ng's younger brother, he lived in the countryside
and, as a result, garnered little respect within the family. To him it
seemed that his elder brother, his nephew, and his niece by marriage
were aliens from another world. He never expressed this thought
publicly, however, because he feared that it would reveal him to be
an old-fashioned country bumpkin. Whenever Miss Moon returned
home from her periodic trips to the city, Mr. Two dared not criticize
the affectations of speech and behavior that she had picked up from
the progressive, civilizing movement then raging throughout the
country. Upon receiving the news that Great-Grandpa was ill, he
rushed to his bedside in the city, where he remained day and night.
He helped his father sit up and lie down, emptied his spittoon, and
spoon-fed him porridge. He did not begrudge his older brother,
Grandpa H6ng, for lying in bed and smoking opium all day or his
nephews and nieces for ignoring the old man. In his mind their
neglect of his father, simply afforded enhanced opportunities for
him to fulfill his own filial duty.
The crowd shuffled upstairs into the room and assembled quietly
around the bed. Mr. Civilization made room for Dr. Spleen and Dr.
Lung beside the patient and brought over the pile of leaves and the
vial of dirty water.
"Behold the sacred medicine from the Bia Pagoda. Dear doctors,
while the progressive nature of human science is beyond doubt, its
ability to save lives does not yet compare to the miraculous power of
the saints."
Dr. Spleen examined the leaves. "Daisies and purslane!? Is that
all?"
Dr. Lung held the vial of water up to the light. "What the hell is
this? Pond water?"
Mr. Civilization looked over at Red-Haired Xuan. "That's all it is,"
Xuan responded immediately. "But, in this case, it's a powerful
sacred medicine. I have consulted the yin-yang coins; they have
suggested this treatment. I have seen thousands of people cured in
this way."
"These curatives are redundant," Dr. Spleen said bitterly. "I pre-scribed and administered three doses already. The patient's recovery
is well under way...
"Dear colleague," Dr. Lung interjected, "I do not wish to question
your success in this matter, but, if the patient had recovered fully,
there would have been no need for the family to purchase curatives
from the Bia Pagoda!"
Dr. Spleen snatched the vial of dirty water from the hands of Dr.
Lung. "Let me see that!" he snapped. "This is not pond water! It's
simply water from a rice field! If he drinks this water, he will be
beyond recovery! There will be no patient left to cure." Are you talking to me?" protested Dr. Lung. "How dare you? It
wasn't I who made that ridiculous prescription!"
But Dr. Spleen ignored his mistake. "So what if it's not your
prescription? You identified it as pond water when it is clearly field
water. Any true herbalist should be able to tell the difference!"
"Fine, I give up!" Dr. Lung pouted. "I guess that makes you the
only qualified herbalist in the country!"
"My qualifications are none of your business!"
The famous herbalists stood face-to-face, their tempers simmering
to a boil.
"I don't see why you are so damned arrogant! The funeral of
Provincial Governor Vi was only two days ago!"
"Oh! Please! Provincial Governor Vi was over sixty when he died!
You can't hold me responsible for what happened to him! But what
about the case of that little girl... Ch~t... the daughter of Mr.
Vinh? She died after taking two of the doses that you prescribed!"
Dr. Lung stretched out his open palms defensively. "Who told
you that? Who said she had taken only two doses? Was it my fault
that she ate those plums when she had a fever? She would have
been fine, otherwise! Two doses? Who was the bastard that pre-scribed that shoddy, two-bit stomach medicine for Dq.i the clerk? He
almost died because of that! What kind of herbalist would do that?
They should throw you in jail for that one! You charlatan!"
But Dr. Spleen did not flinch. "Charlatan? At least I haven't
caused any miscarriages."
Dr. Lung's eyes bulged out like two stuffed snails. "How dare
you!? Go ahead! Say something else! I dare you!"
"I'm not afraid of you! I'll say whatever I want! I'll say it to the
French Security Police if I please! How would you like that!?"
"Don't you threaten me! I'll tell them about the time that you mas-saged the eyeball of one of your patients so much that it popped right
out! You're the bastard responsible for that one! You're the bastard!"
"Can I help it if he was going blind? How about the time you tried
to fix that little boy's astluna with that bogus ear-wood fungus? You
kept at it for weeks with no results!"
"What about when Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer started her
menopause and you thought she was pregnant?"
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer stopped giggling and ran shame-faced out of the room. "You are truly cruel! How about when Miss
Moon here had that problem with smelly armpits? You prescribed
peppermint oil for over six months, and it still didn't work."
"Six months? You've been treating Miss Snow's mangy itch for
over three years now!"
Miss Moon and Miss Snow stiffened abruptly, stopped their titter-ing, and, red-faced, exited the room together.
Mr. Civilization grabbed Dr. Spleen and dragged him down the
stairs. Mr. Two hustled Dr. Lung out into the hall. Grandpa H6ng
began his usual whining. "I know! I know! What a pain! Shut up,
already!"
The others were either laughing hysterically or commiserating
with Grandma about the doctor's public announcement of her
daughter's mangy itch. The fight between the famous herbalists
roused the eighty-year-old Great-Grandpa from his sleep. He awoke
feeling fit and healthy.
"What's all this commotion?" he asked. "Am I awake, or is this
some sort of dream?"
After expelling the famous herbalists from the house, Mr. Civiliza-tion returned and sat down beside the bed.
"Your children and grandchildren are happy because you have
recovered, Great-Grandpa."
"I'm recovered? I'm not dead? I kowtow before Heaven!"
"You are all better now, Great-Grandpa, thanks to Dr. Xuan."
"What? Where is that medicine from the Bia Pagoda?"
"You've taken half of it already, Great-Grandpa. That's why you
regained consciousness."
"Really?"
"Really, Great-Grandpa!"
Mr. Civilization winked at Xuan.
"Great-Grandpa," Xuan began, "I consulted the yin-yang
coins... They foretold that Heaven would help the doctor that
consulted its powers. Heaven ignores herbalists."
"Where is the rest of the medicine?" the old man asked eagerly.
Red-Haired Xuan handed over the field water and several daisy
leaves.
"They say that the sacred medicine must come from a pond. It
will only work if it is extremely dirty and stinky. Don't try to trick
me. I am just an old man."
The old man swallowed a few leaves and downed several cap-fulls of field water. Sacred medicine, indeed! A half-hour later the
old man had begun to regain his strength. He sat up and ate half a
bowl of porridge.
After everyone had gone home or fallen asleep, Red-Haired Xuan
and Miss Snow remained in the patient's room. Even Mr. Two was
asleep on the sofa, content in the knowledge that the old man was
on the road to recovery. For Miss Snow fulfilling her duty toward
Great-Grandpa was little more than an excuse to stay up alone with
Red-Haired Xuan. The two did not speak but exchanged a series of
knowing glances. The patient slept quietly. He did not cough, spit
up, or moan.
The moon shone brightly through the glass window.
Finally, Miss Snow boldly broke the silence. "Excuse me, Sir. That
herbalist doctor lied. I... I... I got over that mangy itch long
ago."
Red-Haired Xuan was too embarrassed to respond, and another
awkward silence ensued.
"Medical students are so stuck up," Miss Snow thought to her-self, and, overcome with bitterness, she returned to her room.
Victory for the Common People in the
Europeanization Shop
A Financial Plot
A Love Plot
In only two weeks the Popular Movement had achieved a stunning
victory.
Two weeks before, fate had inserted Red-Haired Xtian into the
bourgeois family of Mr. Civilization. With each passing day, his
prestige and influence grew. Almost effortlessly and without being
truly aware of it, he was gradually becoming an important player in
society. His stupidity was mistaken for a combination of courtesy
and modesty, and it made him wildly popular. Now it was merely a
waiting game; a simple matter of time before he was catapulted to
the top.
Whenever the fortune-teller came over to praise Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer's fidelity to her late husbands and confirm that her son
(No way!) was indeed a gift sent directly from Heaven, he always
made a point to predict a prosperous and exalted future for Red-Haired Xuan. In turn, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer boasted of
Xuan's education and refinement to the horned senior clerk. The
horned senior clerk pointed out repeatedly Xuan's youthful promise
to Grandpa H6ng (I know! What a pain! Shut up, already). Grandpa
H6ng reiterated approvingly to Grandma and Great-Grandpa that
Xuan was a student from the medical college. And, of course, every-
one repeated eagerly what they had heard from everyone else. To
reap all of these unexpected accolades, Red-Haired Xuan had to do
little more than occasionally praise the prowess of the fortune-teller.
The truth, it seems, was known only to the Civilizations, but they
dared not disclose it for fear that it might reflect badly on them. How
could they admit that Xuan was originally from a lower-class family,
that he had worked as a ball boy at the tennis courts, and that he was
fired from this lowly post for lewd and immoral behavior? What
would such a revelation mean for the Europeanization Tailor Shop?
What about Red-Haired Xuan's popularity among female customers
who had come to admire his silver tongue, quick wit, and good
humor? Such thoughts consumed Mrs. Civilization. Her husband,
on the other hand, was preoccupied by the fact that he had lied to
his status-conscious father about Red-Haired Xuan's credentials as a
student from the medical college. Hence, although he resented Xuan
for saving his grandfather with the sacred medicine from the Bia
Pagoda-an unforgivable sin-he held his tongue about Xuan's real
background. As for Grandpa H6ng (I know! What a pain!), despite
his surprise and disappointment that the leaves and dirty water had
actually cured his father, he dared not reveal his true bitterness
toward Xuan. After all, his son kept reminding him that Xuan was a
student from the medical college and his son-in-law-the horned
senior clerk-lauded Xuan as someone who deserved respect for his
high education and youthful promise.
Hence, Xuan's fortunes continued to rise. When addressed as
"Doctor" by Grandma, Mr. Two, Miss Moon, Miss Snow, or Joseph
Thie't, he simply smiled and kept silent. When Mrs. Deputy Customs
Officer leered at him lustfully, he remained stoic and indifferent.
Following Great-Grandpa's complete recovery, Grandma invited
Xuan to a formal banquet in his honor. This ushered in a new era of
freedom and equality in which Xuan became a habitual guest at par-ties held by Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer and the Civilizations.
Soon it was considered an honor to have Xuan as a dinner guest.
Many people admired and respected him. Others envied and hated
him, but this mattered little. There were also those, more signifi-cantly, who loved and desired him. After prolonged exposure to this
bizarre atmosphere of respect, fear, and flattery, Red-Haired Xuan
began to put on airs. As is often the case in a society in which modesty
is disdained, the more snobbish Xuan became, the more respect he
enjoyed. Even his silence was interpreted, by the tailors and seam-stresses, as a sign of authority. Miss Snow worshiped him because
Grandma worshiped him. It was rumored, in fact, that Grandpa
H6ng (I know! What a pain!) was arranging secretly for Me Su Xuan
to marry his precious daughter, Miss Snow. Hence, he was flattered
and doted upon by Mr. ILL, Joseph Thie"t, Dr. Straight Talk, even High
School Graduate Tan (Mr. Civilization's younger brother). Because
everyone was either being fooled or trying to fool each other, they
were all compelled to fear and respect Xuan.
What a great victory for the common people!
At two that afternoon Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer arrived by car
at the tailor shop. She hoped to induce Xuan to accompany her to La
journee des cavalieres Hanoiennes, a festival at West Lake. It was to
be a grand affair, presided over by important figures in the political
arena. Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was surprised to find Xuan
minding the shop by himself.
"Mr. Xuan?" she said respectfully. "Why not close the shop this
afternoon?"
"Why should I close the shop?" Xuan replied breezily. "I can take
care of things here on my own."
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was silent for a moment.
"Have you heard the big news, Mr. Xuan?"
"News?" he replied curtly.
"Oh, Mr. Xuan! Mr. Xuan! My tennis court is almost done."
"Good for you," he replied tersely.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was surprised at the unusually
abrupt way he spoke to her. She imagined that there must be a
reason for his curtness that she had not yet fully grasped. Why else
would he adopt such an insolent tone with her? Feeling somewhat
awkward, she inquired again about the day's plans.
"Aren't you coming along to the festival today?"
"The Europeanization Movement can ill afford my absence, even
for a single day."
"Where are all the seamstresses and tailors?"
"The seamstresses have left for the festival dressed in the mourn-
ing outfits that Mr. ILL designed for Great-Grandpa's funeral. The
clothes were never worn, you may recall, because I saved Great-Grandpa's life... The seamstresses will exhibit the clothes like a
squad of living mannequins. We need to liing-xe this new clothing
line, after all. The tailors will be handing out leaflets for our shop at
the festival."
"I planned to go together with the Civilizations; we would be
pleased if you would join us."
"It seems, Madame, that they have left without you."
Red-Haired Xuan continued to respond in a casual and haughty
tone. As he spoke, he fondled a large pair of rubber falsies that had
been sent from France as a contribution to the Europeanization
Movement of the Great Kingdom of Vi~t. This beautification instru-ment had arrived several days before in a pretty box, covered by a
half-dozen layers of shiny wrapping paper. Mrs. Deputy Customs
Officer looked on lustily as Xuan handled the dirty item. She noticed
now that they were all alone in the big tailor shop, a rare opportu-nity indeed. Before she could bring the conversation around to the
rubber breasts, however, little Master Blessing, who was waiting out
in the car, burst into a hysterical cacophony of "No ways!" Heartbro-ken, she shook hands with Xuan and left the shop.
Xuan smiled to himself. He knew that Mrs. Deputy Customs Offi-cer, although old, was even naughtier than an innocent young girl.
A quick nod from him is all it would take! But she was so old...
what would be the point? Unless, of course, there was some money
in it! He recalled that the talented fortune-teller had predicted that
he would be lucky in love this year. He thought of the money to be
made if only he were to propose some sort of monetary arrangement
with Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer. But he decided to bide his time.
Inadvertently, Xuan had just discovered a principle that most phi-losophers only recognize after their hair turns white: the value of
playing hard to get.
Xuan's cheerful reflections were interrupted by the arrival of the
horned senior clerk. He staggered forlornly into the shop and ex-tended his hand to Xuan in silence.
"You, Sir, are a horned husband!" Xuan announced, shaking his
hand vigorously.
"Very good! Thank you... thank you a thousand times."
The horned senior clerk's gratitude appeared extremely heartfelt,
as if this were the first time someone had dared to inform him of the
devastating news of his wife's affair. But, in fact, he felt nothing.
Moments later, however, he pulled up a chair and began to com-plain. "That loud and dignified voice is good. But next time I want
you to say it when you see me together with my wife. It will be even
better if Grandpa and Great-Grandpa are there as well... "
"How can I say such a thing in front of your wife, not to mention
Grandpa H6ng or Great-Grandpa?"
"Why do you think I paid you that ten piasters?"
"In that case, perhaps I ought to return the money," Xuan said
anxiously.
The senior clerk sprang to his feet.
"God, no! I will die first! I will kill myself," he screamed.
"Please, no!" Xuan replied desperately. "But why do you need me
to... expose your horns?"
But the senior clerk was too worked up to explain. "No! Don't do
this to me! You promised! It's not right to break a promise. Plus, you
must know that your position in the family is far from stable."
"Far from stable?" repeated Xuan in a worried voice.
"But, of course! You must be aware of the myriad reasons why
Mr. ILL is jealous of you. One is that he blames you for spoiling his
wife. Another is that you are better at waiting on customers than he
is. Your skill at taking measurements for custom-made clothes is
clearly superior. He fears that you are usurping his power. Mrs.
Deputy Customs Officer seems annoyed with you as well, although
I haven't yet figured out why. Not only do the Civilizations despise
you secretly, but they seem to consider you a mortal enemy. And do
you know why? It is because you saved Great-Grandpa's life, on the
one hand, and made Miss Snow cancel an arranged marriage, on the
other. I would be careful if I were you! As a close friend, it is my duty
to warn you of these matters... In return, you must honor your
obligation to me. Agreed?"
"But what should I do?"
"You must do what I say. It will, in fact, kill two birds with one
stone."
"What do you mean?"
"Do what I say, and you will not only honor your obligation to
me, but you will regain the love of those who now hate you."
"Hate me? How can they hate me for saving Great-Grandpa's
life?"
"Only Grandma appreciated that. But she is powerless. More
important are Grandpa H6ng and."
"But must I call attention to your horns in front of both your wife
and Great-Grandpa?"
"Yes, indeed! The shock of the news will surely kill Great-Grandpa immediately... Then everyone will be rich, including
me... "
"Is that true?"
"You will see. And don't worry-you will get your share as well."
Xuan hesitated for a moment. Then he shook his head. "I just
can't! It's murder! I'm not a murderer! A criminal! No, I can't do it!"
"Think of it this way. If you help to kill this one person, it will
make many persons extremely happy. That makes it worthwhile.
Also, if you don't do it, then, sooner or later, you will be sacked."
Red-Haired Xuan extended his hand to the horned senior clerk. "I
give you my promise, again... on my honor... "
The senior clerk grasped Xuan's hand tightly and eagerly. "I must
go to work. Thank you in advance!"
As soon as he left, the door swung open again, and a beautiful
woman rushed in. At first Xuan thought that it might be a fashion-able young lady looking to get something tailor-made, but it turned
out to be only Miss Snow.
"Did the senior clerk see me?" she asked breathlessly.
"I don't think so." Xuan responded.
"Thank goodness! Has everyone gone out?"
"They have. Aren't you going to join them at West Lake?"
"I don't want to go! There will be many singing girls and dancing
girls there. They dress as fashionably as I, sometimes even more so.
I'm from a respectable family. What if people mistake me for a danc-ing girl?"
"Quite right."
"Of course, that doesn't mean that I don't know how to dance. I
do! I really do!"
"Yes, of course you do... "
"Can you dance, Mr. Xuan? C'mon, let's tango!"
Xuan was frightened.
"Another time perhaps... There is no music here. Wouldn't you
prefer to go to a dancing hall... one day?"
"A dancing hall? Really? You promise? Imagine me, dancing with
a snobbish medical student!?"
"You misunderstand me, Miss! Please don't think of me as snob-bish. Just because I don't say very much, it doesn't mean that I am
being disrespectful. How could I not respect you, Miss? I thank
heaven that you don't despise me."
Xuan's subtle come-on, his first attempt ever with Miss Snow,
impressed her deeply.
To conceal her emotions, she pointed inquisitively toward the pile
of rubber breasts. "What are those, Mr. Xuan?"
"They are rubber breasts... they are for women who are progres-sive, civilized, and Europeanized."
"Really! I must tell my girlfriends. I have many modem ones, you
know. I'm sure they will all flock to the Europeanization Tailor
Shop."
"I don't believe you have any need for them," Xuan responded
suggestively.
Miss Snow thrust her chest forward. "You think so? Do you think
they are pert enough? They are rather unusual for a modern girl.
And they are real, not rubber!"
As further confirmation that she was, in fact, civilized and mod-ern, Miss Snow stepped boldly toward Xuan. "I give you permission
to examine them!"
Red-Haired Xuan put his hands mischievously behind his back.
"How can one tell what is real these days? Everything is so artifi-cial! Love is artificial! Modernity is artificial! Even conservatism is
artificia 1! "
"Then go ahead," said Miss Snow angrily. "Examine mine and
see... see for yourself if they are artificial!"
Xuan looked around the empty store and peered out the window.
Then he cupped Miss Snow's breasts in his hands, trying to deter-mine their authenticity. When he was satisfied that they were, in
fact, the genuine article, he kissed her gently on the hand. "They are
indeed authentic-a true rarity in this artificial life."
Miss Snow was very moved and sighed deeply. "I wonder if you
might help me with something," she said softly. "I'd be ever so
grateful."
"It would be an honor!"
"I do not want to marry my fiance. I know that he will sprout
horns if I am forced to marry him. He is nothing like you! He is from
the countryside, and I fear that he will not know how to love me in a
civilized way. It's a real shame."
"What can I do?"
"Perhaps... perhaps you can pretend that you are courting
me... If we pretend that we are romantically involved, my fiance
will be forced to leave me. Understand? We will only pretend! For
this plan to work, I need to be dishonored, to be thought of as a bad
girl."
"Is that so?"
"Of course, you will be dishonored as well, as the defiler of my
virginity!"
"If you promise not to give me horns in the future, I would be
willing to do more than just pretend to dishonor you. I would be
willing to actually defile your virginity."
"Doctor! Do you mean it?"
"It would be my great honor to be the cause of your dishonor."
"Oh, thank you! I love you so much! But you must ask for some
time off. How many days will you need to dishonor a respectable
and well-behaved girl like myself?"
For the rest of the afternoon they continued the discussion-Xuan, man of the common people, and Miss Snow, the modern
woman.
A Real-Life Fairyland
The Philosophy of an Adulteress
An Example of "Semi-Virginity"
To the west of Hanoi lies a lake, recently divided into two smaller
lakes separated by a single road known as Old Fish Road. The road
is famous throughout the country-all twenty million of our compa-triots know of it-because it is here that girls from good and not-so-
good families go out with young male college students, law stu-dents, and students without institutional affiliation. They come to
this road night after night to flirt with each other and to transgress
the rules of each other's families. After several months they invari-ably jump together into one of the lakes.
Initially, most people jumped into West Lake, but, because it was
very deep, few of those who attempted suicide survived. Hence,
people eventually shifted to the more shallow and less dangerous
White Bamboo Lake. Another reason for the growth in popularity of
the White Bamboo Lake was the state's clever decision to post bill-boards that read, "No Garbage in West Lake."
Night after night idle rickshaw pullers and jobless young men
who could swim loitered around the banks of the lake. There they
waited expectantly for a heart-rending and plaintive "Save me!"
whereupon they would dive into the waters and fish out a beauti-ful girl. Next stop was the Hang D~u Police Station, where they
would receive a monetary award, pose for newspaper photos, and
sit through numerous noisy interviews. As a result, White Bamboo
Lake became an important setting for those awful tragedies staged
regularly in Hanoi during which the evil Vietnamese family con-spires to prevent free marriage, free divorce, free remarriage, and
so on.
The White Bamboo Lake might have remained forever and ever
little more than a contemporary barometer of tragic conflict between
the Old and the New, the Individual and the Family, Self-Sacrifice and
Political Awakening, and Oppression and Liberation, had not a great
patriot decided to construct on its banks an irresistible (even to the
French) lakeside inn known as the Fairyland Hotel. On the day the
hotel opened, the Protectorate attempted to purify and exorcize
the atmosphere surrounding the lake by ordering schoolgirls to prac-tice a special dance in which they performed as fairies who descend to
earth and release the souls of those who had actually died during their
suicide attempts. As a result, the Fairyland Hotel became as well
known as Old Fish Road and White Bamboo Lake. All self-respecting
Vietnamese felt obliged to stay at the hotel at least once, in order to
avoid being chided by fashionable intellectuals for forsaking their
roots or losing their country to foreigners.
Given the liberationist ideology of Miss Snow, it is no surprise
that she saw the hotel as the perfect site to be dishonored. For Xuan
it was as good a place as any to fulfill his solemn obligation of
defiling the virginity of a respectable girl. They entered the hotel
through the Japanese-style concrete gate.
"We will rent a room together, my dear!" Miss Snow said to
Xuan. "We will eat together, drink together, and dance together! We
will play Ping-Pong and go boating together. Everyone must see us
together."
Xuan racked his brain for a flowery reply, but he could only come
up with a sentence that Mr. ILL used frequently with female custom-ers in the tailor shop.
"We are honored to serve you, Madame."
Xuan's flat delivery and straight face made Miss Snow think he
was making a joke. She burst out laughing in a way common among
fashionable women. "Oh, my goodness! What a sense of humor you
have, Doctor!"
They sauntered leisurely through the hotel flower garden, as natu-ral as any pair of secret lovers.
"Before we rent a room, let's take a tour of Fairyland!" Miss Snow
whispered to Xuan.
The Fairyland Hotel was, indeed, a magnificent castle. For Viet-namese who had money to burn it possessed anything and every-thing that might possibly bring happiness. A team of architects had
employed all of their creative energy to erect an extraordinary build-ing overhanging the lake. Its numerous balconies were constructed
so that guests might be able to watch each other boating and swim-ming. Its huge garden contained a tennis court, Ping-Pong tables,
and a swimming pool. There was a dancehall and a wireless radio
room. The restaurant specialized in French and Chinese cuisine and
served all manner of rare and expensive delicacies. For those who
could afford the bill, a night in the hotel offered all the pleasures of
modern life presented in an atmosphere as refined as the old impe-rial capital. If the Fairyland Hotel did not exist, how could the Viet-namese hold up their heads among foreigners? The hotel provided a
perfect place for the idle bourgeois to come together and forget their
ennui. It contained sixty rooms and dozens of young female love
peddlers (also known as top-grade quality hens), following a system
innovated in more civilized countries.
When Xuan and Miss Snow arriyed at eight o'clock Sunday morn-ing, the hotel was relatively empty. There were a few people on the
tennis courts and several others playing Ping-Pong. Half a dozen
elegantly dressed men and women sat drinking on a balcony looking
out over the lake. Three glamorous hotel hens, dressed as upper-class girls, lolled about looking for men with whom to go swimming.
Everyone was chatting merrily.
A modern-looking girl extended her hand to Xuan and Miss Snow
and started introducing them to the other guests. "Allow me to
introduce Mr. Xuan, the manager of the Europeanization Tailor
Shop, a skillful measurer of women, and a designer who has created
many beautiful and fashionable outfits. We women have benefited
greatly from his talents."
"You must be a colleague of Mr. ILL," a young man said, respect-fully.
"That is correct."
At that moment the hotel owner appeared, all dressed up as if for
a big party. Red-Haired Xuan blanched and looked around for a
place to hide. Miss Snow stepped forward to introduce them.
"Doctor Xuan, my boyfriend... Mr. Victor Ban, the owner of
Fairyland... "
Victor Ban bowed his head low and shook hands with Xuan, who
stood frozen in place like a wooden statue. Just like Xuan, Victor Ban
had also recently reinvented himself-from the King of Venereal
Disease Treatment to the owner of the Fairyland Hotel. But Xuan's
transformation-he was now a doctor-was quite unbelievable!
After a stint as an unsuccessful horse jockey, Mr. Victor Ban real-ized that the tides of civilization sweeping over our country were to
be accompanied by waves of venereal disease. He decided to change
his job. Mixing cat jelly with eucalyptus oil and little bits of clay, he
fashioned a relatively effective treatment for the affliction. As with
other self-respecting Kings of Venereal Disease Treatment, his cures
rarely lasted as long as advertised. But, nevertheless, within two
years he had become a millionaire. Flush with capital, he quickly
built a large brothel outside of the city center and hired ten prosti-tutes. Every time a young, healthy man began frequenting his
brothel, they would eventually be directed by one of the working
girls to the clinic of Victor Ban. Temporarily cured, they would visit
the brothel again, creating a sort of continuous shuttle service be-tween the brothel and the clinic. Victor Ban grew richer and richer.
His agents worked in all three regions of the country. His cars can-vassed every street, broadcasting incessantly over loudspeakers on
the unchecked spread of nocturnal emissions, wet dreams, chilly
semen, painful vaginal discharge, syphilis, and gonorrhea. In addi-tion, he treated perforated lungs, ripped intestines, heart illnesses,
eye problems, and various ear ailments. His jingles were so perva-sive and persuasive that healthy people feared for their lives, pur-chased his medicines, and sung his praises as a patriot and a great
humanitarian. Among our twenty million compatriots, Victor Ban
had become a household name... Soon thereafter, he plotted to
create a place of refuge-a fairyland-within this venereal disease-infested land so that the people might forget their painful and stink-ing sores. Hence, he opened the Fairyland Hotel.
It was only a few years ago that he had paid a bastard and vaga-bond-now Dr. Xuan-twenty cents per day to sit on the hood of his
cars and scream into the loudspeaker:
"Wet dreams, syphilis... " It
was almost beyond belief! This same Xuan was now the boyfriend of
Grandpa H6ng's youngest daughter, Miss Snow, and a respected
doctor.
Xuan and Victor Ban stood staring at each other. Luckily for Xuan,
they were interrupted by one of the modern girls. "How is business
at the tailor shop?"
"It is the busiest store around!" Miss Snow replied. "It is so good
that Xuan has quit medical school. They teach nothing of value there
anyway! It's a waste of time. Now he has more time for ten-nft."
During the conversation a young man had been staring at Xuan's
red hair. "Which kind of dye you use in your hair, Sir? It's beautiful.
Very fashionable! I want to dye my hair too, but I haven't found a
good brand... I'd like a perm as well."
"Come to my shop, and I will suggest a product that should work
for you," Xuan replied.
"Now, now!" said the girl, chiding the man and flattering Miss
Snow simultaneously. "Mr. Xuan's job is to promote the latest fash-ions and most elegant styles. Beautiful hair is just part of the whole
package. Everyone knows that!"
Mr. Victor Ban turned to Miss Snow. "Do you plan to stay here all
day or only for a brief stay?"
She elbowed Xuan in the side. "What do you think, boyfriend?
Just one day? Maybe it will be more fun to stay longer?"
Xuan tried to calculate how long it might take to defile the honor
of a respectable girl. "Let's decide after lunch."
Victor Ban excused himself. Another elegantly dressed young
man approached the group and addressed Xuan.
"I would be honored if you would play a sec with me," he said.
Xuan agreed, and everybody moved to the tennis court. It took
less than an hour for Red-Haired Xuan to defeat the young man. The
crowd applauded, and Miss Snow beamed with pride. Xuan's easy
victory, shameless showboating, and fancy racket and footwork
gave him the glamorous aura of the privileged son of a famous
Mandarin or a provincial governor. Victor Ban returned to investi-gate the commotion. Seeing the crowd go wild for the victor, he
decided that this Xuan could not be the same Xuan who had once
worked for him.
After the game the loser congratulated Xuan and expressed his
desire for a rematch at a later date. Overcome with pride, Miss Snow
thought to herself that Xuan clearly deserved not only to be her
boyfriend but to ruin her reputation as well. Hence, back in their
room she was taken aback when he plopped down on the bed,
utterly exhausted. She took a seat on the arm of a chair and sadly
contemplated his impolite behavior. Suddenly, she heard the sound
of a female voice singing from the adjacent room.
Ze... da... da... mua.
Mong pe' y ~ Pa ri! .
"Oh, my darling!... Oh, Miss Snow!" Xuan called out, oblivious
to the singing.
"Be quiet! My goodness... it's... it's... my sister! Sunset!"
"Oh, no!" Xuan cried out. "Who's that? Is it Mrs. Civilization?"
"No! Keep your voice down! It's my sister, the wife of the senior
postal clerk!"
"Really? Is the horned senior clerk there, too?"
"How do you know about the horns?" Miss Snow asked in aston-ishment. "How? How did you find out that Sunset has a lover?"
"How could I not know?!" Xuan replied cleverly.
At that moment Mrs. Sunset, the wife of the horned senior clerk,
and her lover were having an intimate conversation, unaware that
Xuan and Snow were eavesdropping in the next room.
"Oh, my love," cooed Mrs. Sunset's lover, "we can't go on like
this forever. It's too dangerous."
"What do you mean?" Mrs. Sunset asked angrily.
"I want you... I want us to get married!"
"You mean... you want me to divorce my husband?"
"What else could I mean?"
"But... I want you as a lover not a husband! Would you really
want to be my husband? Then you would have horns, too! Isn't it
better that he have horns instead of you?"
"Damn! What kind of woman has such a bizarre ideology?"
"What's so bizarre about it? Men may not understand it, but that's
the way all women think today! To have only a husband and no
lover is cowardly! Where is the virtue in that, the beauty, the intelli-gence? Not even a ghost would desire a woman like that! If I had no
lover, my friends would scorn me! How could I show my face in
public? I would barely be considered a real woman at all! A water
buffalo is only a true water buffalo when it eats and fights. You
should be happy that I am faithful to you and do not take a second
lover."
"Then why aren't you faithful to your husband as well?"
"I am faithful to both of you! My husband and my lover! That's
what makes me a woman."
"But, I'm afraid that he may find out one day... "
"Never! He was born with horns. Believe me, he'll never know. If
the owl knew that he stank, then he would not stink anymore!...
'Ze da da mua! Mong a mang, m6ng ma rrri!' " She sang the rest of
the song.
"What a virtuous woman!" Xuan whispered to Miss Snow. "How
worthy! How fashionable!"
Xuan's praise for her older sister made Miss Snow jealous. "And I
suppose you think that I-"
Xuan kissed Miss Snow passionately on the mouth. "You are also
worthy!" he said in a sultry voice.
"My family is wealthy, sophisticated, and civilized," Miss Snow
said, holding her head high. "My sister and I must be exactly alike in
all things. It's the only way to maintain family decorum!"
Xuan hurriedly placed his hands on Miss Snow's breasts. This
time, however, she pushed them away.
"You have done that already. Are you not yet satisfied that they
are not made of rubber?"
But after Red-Haired Xuan offered a broad variety of suggestive
comments, Miss Snow relaxed her resistance and remained silent,
thus confirming the profound uncanniness of the fairer sex. They
joked back and forth and eventually began uttering virtuous and
deep-felt sentiments to each other.
"Our love is a noble love... "
"Our love is a pure and soulful love."
Finally, Red-Haired Xuan brought up the ultimate favor.
"Quiet! Leave me alone!" Miss Snow stood up angrily. "I will
never give you the ultimate favor! You are not a polite man! I am not
as foolish as many innocent girls! I plan to remain a partially pure
girl!"
Red-Haired Xuan was astounded.
"In other words, a demi vierge!" she continued. "I will maintain
half of my virginity!"
"Half of your virginity? A semi-virgin?"
"Of course!" Miss Snow replied haughtily. "How can I let my
virginity be completely lost! Do you think I would risk the delivery
of an earless roasted pig the day after my wedding?!"
From then on Xuan was proper and well behaved. He understood
that Miss Snow was a semi-virgin, an unusual kind of woman that
our land of Nam can be proud to have produced here in the twenti-eth century.
Red-Haired Xuan the Poet
A Fight Over Horns
The Conservatism of Mrs. Deputy
Customs Officer
After eating an elegant French meal in the dining room like the
other upper-crust Vietnamese guests, Miss Snow suggested a walk
in the Fairyland Hotel's garden. Fearing another encounter with
Victor Ban, Xuan cited exhaustion and politely declined.
"That's odd," Miss Snow pouted. "You don't go to the Fairyland
Hotel to be exhausted. You go to have fun! This is an era of science,
physical fitness, and sports. How can you be exhausted? You are a
healthy young man, a doctor no less! Are you telling the truth? I
thought you loved women desperately like the French! It makes me
wonder what might have happened had I allowed you to defile my
honor."
Her ideas impressed Xuan, and he struggled for a response. "We
are very honored to serve you."
He turned to leave, but Miss Snow stopped him. "What's the
rush?!"
She began counting out loud to herself on her fingers. "One fe-male friend, two male friends, Victor Ban-that's four people! There
are now at least four people, my dear, who must suspect that I'm a
bad girl. Isn't it wonderful? It will only be a matter of days until
rumors reach my parents and that bastard of a fiance. Sweet revenge
will soon be mine!"
"The life of a horned husband is full of misery," Xuan said. "Nor
is there much joy for a horned fiance."
"How profound you are!" Miss Snow replied, laughing. "Your
way of speaking is so characteristically twentieth century. But there's
no need to worry. I could never plant horns on your head."
She paused for a moment. "You have never mentioned your par-ents before. How is the health of your via and the old woman of your
house?"
"I was orphaned as a small child," Xuan answered sadly.
"Did you lose both of your parents, or is one still alive?"
"They both died."
Miss Snow's eyes lit up.
"That makes you an even better catch! If I marry you, I won't have
a mother-in-law! What happiness! What a stroke of luck that you
were orphaned early."
Xuan did not know how to respond.
"No need to worry, Doctor," she continued. "I'm not as reek.Jess
as other girls. I know how to protect myself."
"You will have to do it eventually... "Xuan replied impishly.
"Forget about it!" she said firmly. "I suppose you are looking
forward to cutting off the ears of the roast pig on our wedding
night?"
Her sharp response pleased Red-Haired Xuan and gave him hope
that, if he were to marry Miss Snow in the future, he need not worry
about sprouting horns.
Arm in arm, they walked outside together and into a garden that
was as lush and colorful as a real fairyland. Lilies and snapdragons
bloomed in the flower beds, and withered petals lay helter-skelter
along the pebbled path. After several minutes they noticed that they
were being followed by a short young man with glassy eyes, an
emaciated body, and the gaunt face of a poet. He wore a European-style suit, and his pants were cuffed in the so-called elephant style.
He stared anxiously at Miss Snow.
''Here! I'll show you someone who is desperate to win my
heart... "she whispered to Xuan.
Xuan's face reddened with jealousy, and he turned around to
look. Focusing intently on the object of his desire, the young man
did not notice Xuan and continued to walk toward Miss Snow in his
elephant cuffs.
"Ignore him, my dear!" Miss Snow said in a low voice. "He is just
a poet! He can't do any harm."
Miss Snow grinned merrily as young girls often do when they are
being pursued. She began hopping and skipping between the with-ered flowers along the pebbled path. The poet followed her. Just as
Xuan was about to scold him for being impolite and presumptuous,
the young man stopped and recited a poem aloud.
The fairy's feet were light as air.
Ashamed, young buds fell everywhere.
Beauty envies rival beauty.
She tramples flowers underfoot-alas.
Miss Snow giggled appreciatively, and Xuan's hatred gave way to
a begrudging respect. Like poets everywhere, the young man did
not flinch in the face of life's bitterness. Instead, he put on a brave
face and recited another poem.
If not a bud beneath her feet,
My heart is sad, my gloom complete.
I pick a wilted flower up
To press against my throbbing heart!...
The poet stopped and bent down. He picked up a flower and
pressed it tightly against his heart as if embracing an imaginary
lover. No longer hearing the patter of footsteps behind her, Miss
Snow glanced back over her shoulder. There she saw the poet hug-ging the flower with both arms.
"How moving!" she said. "That man has been following me for
months. He loves me deeply, but I feel nothing for him!"
"Is he really in love with you?" asked Xuan between clenched
teeth.
"What else would you call it?"
A number of literary possibilities ran through Xuan's mind. He
felt compelled to compose a brief poem to compete with his new
rival. How hard could it be? He recalled numerous jingles that he
had recited flawlessly by heart in the past, back when he chanted
advertisements over a loudspeaker for Victor Ban. "Would you like
me to improvise a poem for that guy?"
Miss Snow clapped her hands with joy. "I would like nothing
more," she squealed.
Placing his hands behind his back, Red-Haired Xuan approached
the poet and began to versify in a loud and dignified voice:
No matter if you're young or old,
Avoid the sun, the wind, the cold.
Beware fevers, headaches, and the flu;
dry skin and heat rash make you blue.
Day and night you'll rant and rave.
Your feet won't walk, your hands won't wave.
For you I have these words to say:
Buy our ointment, don't delay.
Red-Haired Xuan wanted to continue, but the young man put up
his hands to signal surrender.
"Forgive me, Sir!" he stammered. "Your humble student has
learned his lesson... Your talent is truly great! I clearly must study
the satirical poetic genres before I even dare attempt a response!"
Shamefaced, the poet bowed low to Xuan. Then he turned and
scurried off.
"My goodness! What a talented man you are! Your poem was as
scathingly satirical as Tu M&'s. But why is your verse so full of
medical terms?"
Stumped by the question, Xuan responded cleverly with one of
his own. "Why do you think it is?"
Miss Snow then answered for herself:
"Of course! You were a
student at the medical college! That's why your poetry is so scien-tific. Right? Yours is the poetry of a man of medicine."
Xuan and Miss Snow strolled merrily over to the swimming pool.
Suddenly, Miss Snow blanched. "Damn! It's the senior clerk! I've got
to get out of here!"
She ducked behind a tree and disappeared.
Red-Haired Xuan spied the horned senior clerk walking together
with a young woman. His beard was neatly trimmed, and he was
dressed in an unusually elegant way. In spite of his horns, he looked
uncharacteristically content, almost happy. His companion dressed
in a style that was partially modem and partially old-fashioned. She
looked like someone who embraced both the bad manners of a liber-ated woman and the old virtues of a traditional one. It was difficult
to tell, in fact, which kind of woman she was!
Red-Haired Xuan was unsure if the woman was the senior clerk's
wife. If not, then life was even more complicated than he had imag-ined. In any case Xuan quickly recalled his obligation to the senior
clerk. After gesturing for the couple's attention, he bowed low,
straightened himself up, and stuck out his chest.
"You, Sir, are a homed husband!" he announced in the booming
voice of a human loudspeaker.
The senior clerk turned pale. "This, this is... my girlfriend,
only!" he stammered.
"No kidding!" Xuan replied stupidly. "What a lucky coincidence!
At this minute your wife is here in the hotel with her boyfriend.
They are tending to your horns as we speak."
The senior clerk turned even paler. "What!?" he screamed
hoarsely. "Right here in the Fairyland?"
"Where else could such a thing happen?" Xuan replied.
"Damn it! Take me to her now! Please! Let's go!"
Red-Haired Xuan immediately started to lead the way, eager to
witness a love affair. Xuan stopped in front of the room and glanced
at the homed senior clerk. The homed senior clerk took a deep
breath and knocked at the door. After fifteen minutes the door
cracked open. A high-pitched scream echoed from within the room.
"My God! My husband!"
"That bitch! That ill-bred dog!" the senior clerk scowled.
Red-Haired Xuan and the other woman stood by apprehensively.
The hotel guests were busy swimming, diving, and bathing in the
lake, oblivious to the tragic predicament of the senior clerk.
His wife's lover came to the door, fully dressed. "Greetings, Sir!"
he said gently. "So, you are the husband?"
"Who the hell else would I be?" replied the senior clerk, fuming
with anger.
His wife's lover bowed his head respectfully. His plan was to
outmaneuver the senior clerk by demonstrating superior social
skills.
"I am honored to make your acquaintance, Sir. Please try to keep
in mind our exalted social positions. I am sure you will agree that it
is important for us to maintain the utmost decorum."
The gambit seemed to produce the desired effect on the senior
clerk.
"Yes, of course. In spite of my horns, I am still a refined, upper-class intellectual."
"I am glad you are being so sensible. I trust you will continue to
maintain your level-headedness. After all, this is certainly not your
first pair of horns. There is no reason to get angry. It will only make
people laugh at us both. Indeed, I must tell you that, in spite of all
that has happened, I still respect your wife deeply."
Ever conscious of their social reputations, the two men continued
to address each other in extremely respectful tones. Eventually, how-ever, the senior clerk began to break down.
"Sir, although my wife has put her clothes back on, I remain some-what concerned. You must know the old saying:'When a man visits a
woman's room, he is absent-minded, but when a woman visits a
man's room, she is a slut."'
His wife's lover was impressed by the intellectual power of the
senior clerk's reasoning. Sensing the impossibility of denying his
adulterous crime, he tried a different approach.
"Sir, sprouting horns is not so bad. It is merely a question of bad
luck, like an unintended accident. Take Napoleon, for example. Not
only did he win great victories in the North and the East, but he was
extremely handsome. And yet he too sprouted horns."
The comparison to Napoleon eased the mind of the horned senior
clerk. But he continued to protest. "Whether it's my fault or not,
there is no profit in sprouting horns. How do you plan to compen-sate me for the damage that you have inflicted? Perhaps I ought to
seek recourse from the law?"
The idea of police or media involvement frightened the lover. He
racked his brain for another solution. "Sir, it is I, in fact, who have
sprouted horns!"
"Oh! Oh! Is that possible?" asked the senior clerk in disbelief.
"It is, indeed! Your wife told me that she was unmarried and
considers me to be a sort of common-law husband. This is the first
time I have heard of your existence. You have caught us red-handed,
that is true. But, in point of fact, your wife has been enjoying two
husbands simultaneously. Hence, I am also a horned husband. I too
have been damaged. I also demand compensation!"
"I don't know what you are talking about! Mr. Xuan, will you
please confirm to this man that I am the horned husband?"
Xuan bowed his head. "We are honored to serve you," he replied
courteously.
"It is unclear who has damaged whom," the lover added threaten-ingly. "Perhaps I should consult my lawyer about this matter. As an
office clerk, you are no doubt familiar with the law. And the law
must be respected!"
Upon hearing the word lawyer, the senior clerk began worrying
about the legality of his own presence in the Fairyland Hotel. He
feared that his reputation as a model official might be tarnished.
Perhaps it was he who would be caught red-handed during his
attempt to catch his wife and her lover red-handed. With these
thoughts in mind, he winked at his own lover and extended his
hand to his wife's.
"Farewell, Sir! I hope to see you again... "
Like an escaped convict, he dashed out the front gate of the Fairy-land Hotel, followed by his lover. Xuan was also struck by the refer-ence to lawyers. Fearing dire repercussions, he walked swiftly away
without looking back.
He quickly came upon Miss Snow. "We must leave immediately,"
he said to her. "Otherwise, there will be trouble!"
Frightened and flustered, Miss Snow followed Xuan to the Japa-nese gate. As they passed through it, the car of Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer pulled up in front of the hotel.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer jumped out of the car and called
out the name of Miss Snow. "You are engaged already, my dear. Your
presence here calls into question the high moral standards of your
family!"
Miss Snow pointed at Xuan. "We're just friends! No more, no
less."
Miss Snow flagged a rickshaw. She got in and took off down the
street, leaving Xuan and Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer behind.
"Young girls today are so ill bred. They do nothing but eat and
go out on the town. A woman's duty is to follow and remain
faithful to her husband. Whatever happened to the three obliga-
tions and the four virtues? Whatever happened to chastity, morality,
and decorum?"
Xuan stood there, his mouth shut tightly like a mussel.
"And you, Mr. Xuan. You must behave yourself. Don't ruin other
people's lives. She is engaged, meaning she is taken already. Remem-ber the saying:'Chase only unmarried men or widows; do not pur-sue the husbands and wives of other people!"'
This brief lecture in morality reminded Xuan of his earlier prob-lems. It also reminded him that Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was,
in fact, a widow.
"Madame, please forgive me," he stammered. "If you were not so
famously faithful to your two ex-husbands... I would certainly
have pursued you, instead!"
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer smiled. "Oh, how naughty of you
to say so!"
She hopped back into her car and sped off, a fugitive from love.
Red-Haired Xuan bade farewell to the Fairyland Hotel and re-turned to the Europeanization Tailor Shop on foot.
Opening Day at the Tennis Court
Red-Haired Xuan: Master Orator
Preparations for a Marriage
The opening of Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer's private tennis court
was truly a historic event for sports in Vietnam. As with most open-ing days, this one included a tea party, champagne toasts, and a
formal speech.
Present at the party were Mr. ILL and his wife, Miss Snow and
her two older siblings (the high school graduate and Mrs. Sunset,
the wife of the horned senior clerk), and the royalist politician
Joseph Thie't.
Sitting amid the huge crowd, Joseph Thie't imagined that he was
a great political leader surrounded by the masses on all sides. Like
a true political leader, Joseph Thie't was deeply concerned about
the good of the nation while simultaneously despising the tastes
and amusements of the masses. Ignoring the noisy din of the
crowd, he opened a French newspaper and read the agreeable
news that a disciple of the royalist Maurras had recently bloodied
the face of M. Leon Blum. He experienced a momentary sensation
that there was no one in the crowd but himself. The crowd ignored
him as well.
Other than little Master Blessing (No way!), everyone who was
anyone in high society came out for the event. The crowd grew more
and more tipsy, and the upper crust sank lower and lower. Mr.
Civilization, frail and supremely unathletic, stood up and raised his
glass. "Ladies and Gentlemen."
Mr. Civilization rattled on for almost an hour. He spoke about the
tradition of sports in ancient Greece, about our own national sport-ing movement, and about the crucial importance of sports for the
future of the race. He recounted the biography of Mrs. Senior Clerk
(otherwise known as Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer) and praised her
fashionable and progressive vision of building a tennis court to pro-mote the cause of sports within her family. He went on to sing the
praises of female athletes, singling out Miss Junior Walking Race. He
also attacked "old fuddy-duddies" who waste all their money build-ing village communal houses, restoring old Buddhist statues and
pagodas, or casting bronze temple bells.
He allowed that the traditional practice of spirit possession might
be considered a kind of sport, although a rather dated one.
The journalist who advocated progressive reforms for society at
large and conservative practices for his own family scribbled down
the great man's valuable ideas.
Mr. Civilization then outlined the qualities characteristic of the
ideal woman so that Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer could be sure that
she was one. He concluded by introducing Red-Haired Xuan: an
exemplary young man and professor of tennis who had received
virtually every honor that someone in his position might possibly
acquire. In short, the speech possessed all the necessary attributes of
a formal oratorical address by a great man of letters or an important
politician: embellishment, fabrication, exaggeration, fantasy, and
duplicity-all dressed up in the dishonest language of literature.
The crowd applauded enthusiastically.
Upon the conclusion of his speech, Mr. Civilization took his seat
in a dignified and falsely modest fashion-as all public announcers
tend to do. His aunt rose to respond. Mrs. Deputy Customs Offi-cer thanked the announcer and all the ladies and gentlemen who
had turned out for the opening day ceremonies of her new tennis
court. She expressed the hope that it would always be so crowded.
Everyone clapped again...
Unfamiliar with the rituals of opening day ceremonies and dis-tracted by the attention bestowed upon him, Red-Haired Xuan did
not realize that he was expected to respond publicly. Instead, he
nursed a tall glass of champagne and applauded loudly with the rest
of the crowd. Even as members of the crowd began glancing at him
expectantly, he folded his arms and remained silent. His ungrateful
attitude provoked murmurs of disapproval from the crowd. Finally,
the wife of the horned senior clerk stood up and addressed him.
"Now it is time for a few words from Mr. Xuan, the tennis professor."
Eager for any opportunity to needle Xuan, Mr. ILL urged him on
as well. "That is right! Every honor should rain down upon the
tennis professor on this, the opening day of the tennis court! Please,
Sir, put your modesty aside. Honor us with your words of wisdom."
"Go ahead, Doctor!" chimed in Miss Snow. "Say something
clever! Show them how it's done!"
Like a mechanical puppet manipulated by a team of puppet mas-ters, Red-Haired Xuan stood up, still holding his champagne. A
speech? He had never before been shy about speaking loudly in
public, and he never lost his voice, two important qualities for a
good orator. In the past he had always been extremely effective
using his voice to conquer, oppress, and move the hearts of the
masses-whether selling roasted peanuts, working as an advertis-ing boy at the theater, or making loudspeaker announcements for
the Cochinchinese King of Venereal Disease Treatment.
Speaking was not the problem. The problem was: what to
say... ?
He thought deeply for several minutes. Gradually, his mind re-called the language often used by the Civilizations and Mr. ILL. He
had grown accustomed to this language ever since the day he began
shouldering the responsibility of Europeanizing society. As he began
to speak, his mind raced forward searching for what to say next.
"My dear girlfriends and boyfriends... "
Xuan based this unusual opening on something he had overheard
at the Fairyland Hotel when he was trying to dishonor the respect-able Miss Snow. The result was unexpectedly encouraging. Never
before had the members of the audience been addressed by a public
orator in such an intimate way. They listened in rapt attention.
"I have played a role in the movement for social reform... Still, I
must work very hard and understand exactly what I am doing...
We are still not Europeanized enough!... A roadblock on the road
of evolution. Sports... Race... What is family happiness if not
the happiness of husbands and their wives? We must all make an
effort to exercise... We do not only reform the outside like those
old fashioned moralists in the past... During this deeply reformist
era, everything conservative will be eliminated!... We are honored
to serve you."
Recalling the slogans typically shouted out when sports champi-ons were awarded their trophies from high-ranking ministers or
governors, Xuan concluded his speech. Lip, lip, lc:J... Hua rra!"
Just then, Joseph Thiet read in his newspaper that royalist newspa-pers were calling for the head of the socialist Leon Blum. Joseph
Thiet, originally a member of the Th~p ttJ Lua Party, slapped his
thighs and yelled out approvingly:
"Bravo! Bravo!"
Following his lead, the crowd broke into thunderous applause.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer issued a loud Lip lip LC!. Several skep-tics in the crowd applauded as well but only because Red-Haired
Xuan had delivered his own extemporaneous speech instead of rely-ing on a prerecorded gramophone announcement, like most real
athletes.
A round of champagne toasts followed during which people flat-tered each other like prime ministers at a summit. Then everyone
descended to the tennis court.
A moving sight awaited their arrival. What a great moment for
sports in this country and for the future of women! On the net of the
tennis court, as brand new as a virgin girl, they saw one...
two... three... four... panties, slips, underwear, trousers, and
pajama bottoms-all made from silk, some embroidered, some
made from lace. The panties, all of which belonged to Mrs. Deputy
Customs Officer, were so stylish that even very old men began to get
excited!
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was furious and scolded the laun-dry woman.
"Who could have known!" the old-fashioned laundress com-plained. "It looked like a good place to hang laundry!"
The items were removed and the tennis court was restored to its
rightful function. For the first match Xuan played Mrs. Civilization.
Then he went against Dr. Straight Talk. Finally, he teamed up with
Dr. Straight Talk to play against Mrs. Civilization and an old friend
of Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer who had married a Frenchman.
Meanwhile, at Grandpa H6ng's house rumors were flying that
l. Hip, hip, hip... Houra 1
Miss Snow had been seen with Mr. Xuan. When she heard the
news, Grandma gritted her teeth like an old-fashioned mother. "Will
you never learn? Spoiling your children like that! When her belly
swells up like a barrel... then you will understand the true mean-ing of Women's Rights, Civilization, Ultra Modernity, and Libera-tion! Remember the old saying, 'Children are spoiled by their moth-ers, grandchildren by their grandmothers!' Because you ruined her,
because you spoiled her-now I will be cursed and criticized!"
To Grandpa, Grandma's conservative theories represented a major
obstacle for the women's liberation movement in the country. He shut
his eyes tightly. "I know! I know! What a pain! Shut up, already!"
Ignoring Grandpa's protest, Grandma ordered the opium servant
into the kitchen. As a civilized man and a supporter of women's
rights, Grandpa H'Ong did not protest this attack on his servant. He
lay yawning beside his opium tray as Grandma rattled on.
"Did you know that Xuan and Snow rented an 8-ten room to-gether?! Can you imagine... ?"
"I know! What a pain! Shut up, already!"
"Who would have suspected such behavior from Mr. Xuan? He
seems so proper and well behaved, yet he turns out to be such a
cad!"
"I know! What a pain! Shut up, already!"
Grandma suddenly imagined the things that men and women
typically do together in a hotel room. She burst into tears like an old-fashioned mother. Hearing Grandma's cries, Grandpa opened his
eyes. "What else, Grandma?"
Grandma cried even louder. "What else? What else can there
be?!"
"You're so very old-fashioned, it's impossible to talk to you!"
"What is old-fashioned? Answer me that! If I may be so bold as to
ask-what the hell is old-fashioned?"
"Nowadays, men and women are not segregated as in the era of
our parents! Nowadays, men and women are free to be friends and
to go out together for fun just like French people! Girls can have
boyfriends just as they can have girlfriends. There is nothing un-usual about it!"
"Who told you that?"
"My son!"
"And are you sure it's such a good thing?"
"Luy has assured me that it is. Even if he's wrong, what's the
difference?"
"Your son! What a show-off! He opened that naughty tailor shop
and now is involved in all kinds of monkey business! It's disgusting!
I can't bear it anymore! Just because I never said anything doesn't
mean I ever approved!"
"Who cares if it's disgusting? I only know that his Europeaniza-tion Tailor Shop brings in hundreds of piasters each month!"
"I'll tell you something else! Your daughter-in-law is now wearing
shorts in front of me, her own husband's mother! How do you like
that! You won't be so easygoing when it's your own daughter who
gets into trouble!"
"How do you know she's pregnant? It's not always that easy!"
"Do you know what they did together? They bathed, they swam,
and they danced! They rented a room together for a whole day!"
A half-hour had elapsed since the dismissal of the opium servant.
Like a proper opium addict, Grandpa's eyes glazed over, and his
nose began to run. He shut his eyes tightly. "I know! What a pain!
Shut up, already!"
"Everyone knows that the two of them closed the door to their
room and took a nap together. Did you know that?"
"So what? What else did they do?"
A look of pain crossed Grandma's face. "What do you think?!"
"How do you know? Who told you?"
"Her older sister!"
"Why was Sunset at the Fairyland?"
"Because her husband went there, that's why!"
"Quick! Call the servant to prepare opium for me! Enough of this
story! Stop making such a fuss!"
But Grandma did not call the servant. Ignoring Grandpa's sacred
rights as an opium addict, she continued to castigate him. "Do you
think we should wait until her belly swells up like a barrel before
making a fuss? Doesn't it bother you that Snow is already engaged?
That bastard Xuan is a no-good, cheating dog! He's not a real man!
Just you wait! I will force Civilization and that wife of his to fire him!
I'll talk to Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer as well, that shameless old
bitch! A tennis court? What a whore! I forbid that bastard Xuan to
come over here ever again!"
"I know! What a pain! Shut up, already!"
"Mark my words, I will beat Snow to death! I will curse that bitch
Deputy Customs Officer, you wait and see!... I will send Civiliza-tion's wife back to her mother! How do you like that, Mr. Progres-sive Civilization?"
"What a pain! Shut up, already! Call the servant to prepare my
opium! Enough of this nonsense!"
Grandma slammed her fist down on the table. "I will not call him!
You wait just a minute! Once you smoke your opium-it will be'I
know, I know' again and again!"
Grandpa sat up. "How dare you? You wait and see! I will marry
Snow to Xuan. I promise! He used to be a student from the medical
college, and now people call him doctor! Who knows, maybe he will
win a tennis championship some day! Our family will be blessed for
seventy generations if Snow gets pregnant by Xuan. Now be quiet
and stop acting so stupid!"
Like all opium addicts, Grandpa became short-tempered when he
needed a fix.
The Peculiar Language of the
Old and the New
A Princess Pricked by a Thorn
The Irony of Fate
The alarm clock rang at eight in the morning. Mr. Civilization kicked
off his blankets and sat up in bed. His lovable wife was nowhere to be
seen. Glancing at the calendar on the wall, he suddenly remembered
that today was Thursday, the day of her tennis lesson.
After washing his face and changing clothes, he buzzed for the
servant, who appeared with a tray of milk cakes, butter, coffee, and
chocolate-the favorite breakfast of upper-class intellectuals. He sat
down at his wife's dressing table. As Mr. Civilization wolfed down
the food, he combed his hair and began to make up his face. He
painted his fingernails with bright-red nail polish. Then he applied
pancake to his cheeks and covered them with a layer of powder.
After toweling his face clean, he dabbed on another clownish layer
of powder. With his black hair curling down the nape of his long
neck, his bulging eyes and Adam's apple, and his milky white face,
he looked like a feminine man of lipstick and powder...
Suddenly, he heard footsteps out in the hall approaching his
room. The door swung open. Before he could curse the stupidity of
the people of Annam for failing to knock before entering a room, he
recognized that this particular Annamese offender was his own
mother. He forced a smile and began wiping off his fashionable face.
"What brings you here so early, Mother?"
Without answering the question, she placed her hands behind
her back and peered around the room. A rolled cigarette dangled
from the corner of her lips. Eventually, she sat down on the bed.
"Where is she?" she asked.
"My wife is at the tennis court," he replied nervously. She shook
her head disapprovingly. "What time did she leave?"
"Probably around seven this morning."
"Oh! What a civilized couple you are!"
He sensed what was coming: another episode in the never-ending
conflict that split all families down the middle, the clash between the
old and the new.
"If you say so, Mother," he replied.
The old woman was furious, but she tried to control herself.
"Why aren't you at the shop? It's late! You will go bankrupt if you
continue to be so lazy! With you sleeping late at home and your wife
away, your employees will steal all of your money!"
Civilization continued to powder his face. "Mr. ILL is looking
after the place, Mother."
Although she did not actually understand his response, she saw
no point in pursuing this line of questioning further. The purpose of
her visit, after all, was to raise the delicate question of Red-Haired
Xuan.
"So, where is Dr. Xuan?" she asked.
"You mean the tennis professor? He is at the tennis court, no
doubt."
Mr. Civilization had been misrepresenting Xuan's background for
so long that he had almost come to believe the lies himself. In a
matter of weeks he had succeeded in transforming Xuan from a ball
boy into a professor. Once he had already presented Xuan as a
progressive and highly educated medical student, it could never be
admitted that he was actually a ball boy from a tennis club.
"I hear that you are going to allow Snow to take tennis lessons,"
Grandma asked. "Is that true?"
The question surprised him. "I don't even know if she is inter-ested. I approve, of course. Tennis is very healthy. It can't do any
harm."
"Mr. Xuan seems very proper and well behaved. Don't you think
so... ?"
"Obviously!" he responded, unaware of his mother's machina-
tions. "After all, did he not cure Great-Grandpa? We must be forever
grateful to him for that. It is also thanks to him that business has
been so good at the tailor shop!"
"But do you really think that Mr. Xuan is proper and well
behaved?"
"No question about it. It is as clear as two plus two makes four."
She paused for a moment. "What would you think if we were to
marry him to Snow? Would Xuan agree?"
This question made Mr. Civilization uneasy, and he frowned.
"Why do you bring it up?" he replied cautiously.
"With a grown-up daughter, it is only natural to think about a
son-in-law. It is the duty of parents to make sure that their children
get married. Of course, you are aware of that."
Mr. Civilization shook his head. "I do not think that it would
work out... "
"Damn!" she said, feigning disappointment. "Why not?"
"They do not come from families of the same social rank!" he
answered, sounding like an old-fashioned moralist. "Plus, who
knows if Mr. Xuan would agree to marry Snow... ?"
"I am afraid that it would be a shame for us if he refused. Any-way, I thought questions of social rank were unimportant to you...
Aren't you always prattling on about... the common people?"
"Why are you so interested in this now, Mother?" he snapped.
"Because Mr. Xuan is proper and well behaved... "
"That's not enough! There must be something else!"
Grandma stood up, approached her son, and stuck a finger in his
face. "There is something else. Mr. Xuan has slept with your youn-ger sister already! You bastard!"
The old woman was overcome by a fit of dizziness. She reached
unsteadily for the wall. "It's all your fault!" she moaned. "You let the
bee live up your sleeve! Now everything is so complicated. You've
ruined your little sister's life. You've sullied the family's honor. And
what about those dirty rumors about him and your wife! Think of
the stories people will tell!"
His mother's words struck Civilization like a thunderbolt. He
was overcome by an urge to reject progressivism and return to the
comforts of conservatism. Her reference to his wife inflamed his
jealousy. Nothing frightened him as much as sprouting horns,
despite the fact that horns were more a sign of progress than
conservatism. Modern women who were virtuous were not a prob-lem. Modern women who were not virtuous were also not a prob-lem, especially for men who thought of women as toys... A
problem only occurred when those toys were one's own sister and
wife... No... It could never happen.
/1 Are you sure about this?
Were there witnesses?"
"Her older sister, the senior clerk's wife, saw them renting a room
in the Fairyland Hotel. What more evidence do we need?"
"How strange! Why didn't she try to stop her younger sister?
Why didn't she tell me?"
"She said she was too ashamed to say or do anything!"
"What does she have to be ashamed of?!"
"She said that she feared Snow would hate her and there would
be a conflict between sisters. You shouldn't let Snow know that it
was her older sister who told on her... "
Mr. Civilization thought for a while. "Let me check out the story
to make sure that it is true. Then we will figure out what to do. Don't
worry, Mother. Whatever's happened has happened. We must not
panic."
Mr. Civilization sprayed perfume on his hair, grabbed his velvet
hat, and raced down the stairs. Then he took off in search of Red-Haired Xuan.
The tennis court was empty except for Mrs. Civilization and Red-Haired Xuan. Miss Jannette, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer's daugh-ter, was home from school visiting her mother. She was seated
courtside, with an open book between her knees. Her attention
drifted back and forth from the action on the court to the pictures in
her book. A couple of poorly dressed ten-year-old ball boys ran back
and forth retrieving balls for Red-Haired Xuan, now a very well-dressed professor in Western-style pants, a sleeveless shirt, and a
pair of white canvas tennis shoes.
Instead of running around the court in tennis shorts, practicing
her backhand, as she had during the previous weeks, Mrs. Deputy
Customs Officer remained upstairs. Her practice regimen had been
interrupted by another sacred task-the task of a gentle mother. For
some unknown reason, in the last two days little Master Blessing
had eaten one less bowl of rice than usual. He would sit, quiet as a
philosopher, for long stretches at a time without disturbing his
nanny. He even stopped saying "No way!" What was happening to
this boy blessed by Heaven and Buddha? The previous afternoon
little Master Blessing had sneezed three times. That evening he got
the hiccups after drinking a glass of water. During the night he wet
his bed only once instead of twice as was customary. Early this
morning he had coughed three times. What a bad omen! Although
she revealed her fears to no one, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer
worried that something was terribly wrong.
Is it possible that little Master Blessing was going "to depart"?
Perhaps the Buddha from the Perfume Pagoda had fallen deeply
in love with his own offspring-who knew if the Buddha had chil-dren of his own? Perhaps the Buddha longed to release his child
from the misery of earthly existence.
The fortune-teller had predicted that little Master Blessing was to
live a long life. Could he be wrong?
Such questions preoccupied Master Blessing's mother and made
her miserable with worry. If all parents are obsessed with the welfare
of their children, imagine the anxiety of a mother with a child sent
directly from Heaven. She had carefully avoided all taboo food and
activities thought to bring bad luck and had refrained from offering
praise for her son that might draw the attention of evil spirits. She
had made offerings and pledged to dedicate her son to Heaven. She
had carried an incense bowl on her head and chanted verse written
in Chinese characters. She had prayed. There was nothing that she
had not done. And still "this" had happened! She contemplated
calling upon the famous monk Brother Tang Phu or consulting with
Dr. Straight Talk. As she stared desperately at little Master Blessing
sitting atop a table in the middle of the room, her gaze fixated upon
the tennis players through the upstairs window. While respecting
and admiring them, she was struck by their callousness in the face of
her son's predicament. Her anger dissipated quickly, however, after
she remembered that she had not yet informed anyone of the news,
not even her maids and servants. She feared that disclosure might,
somehow, bring bad luck... What a mess!
At that moment Mr. Civilization pushed open the gate and
walked into the yard. He tipped his hat to Miss Jannette and stopped
briefly to chat with her. Spying his wife over her shoulder, he was
struck by the fact that her shorts were too short and revealed too
much of her shapely, white legs. This was especially troubling given
her proximity to such a suspicious character as Red-Haired Xuan.
For a moment the very idea of progressive social reform repelled
him. At the very least, he thought, his wife's shorts could do with a
little more conservatism. The sight of Xuan concentrating feverishly
on the game, however, eased his mind a little.
"Enough! How about a short break?" he shouted. "My dear! I
would like to speak with you in private."
She tapped her racket on the ground three times to signal a time-out and headed toward her husband.
"Please excuse us for a minute," Mr. Civilization said politely to
Xuan.
"No problem," replied Xuan, gasping for breath.
The couple walked leisurely toward the gate.
"Do you know what has happened?" the husband asked.
His tone frightened her, and she opened her eyes wide. "What?
What's going on?"
The husband shook his head. "We cannot allow Xuan into our
house ever again! He is a complete bastard!"
"How come? Business is very good and most of our customers
belong to him. Besides, who will practice with me? I need to prepare
for the emperor's visit. Why are you so down on him, anyway?"
"He and our Snow have become entangled."
"Really? Yes, you are probably right. I suspected as much!"
"According to what I've heard, they may have slept together
already."
"Damn it! Really? Are you sure?"
"I want to bash the face of that son-of-a-bitch! You know that we
will be blamed for our sister's behavior. My mother already said that
it is our fault for being so progressive and Europeanized. She blames
us for spoiling Snow. Can you believe it?"
"Mother knows about it? What did she say?"
"Mom and Dad want Snow to marry that bastard. Isn't that
disgraceful?"
"Oh no! Why rush into things? We must find out exactly what
happened!"
"How can we find out? We can't force her to be examined by a
doctor. And, if it is true, she would never dare tell us."
"You are right. She probably loves him and wants to marry him.
She also knows that-if the worst has happened already-our par-
ents must consent to a wedding. She may even try to exaggerate
what they have done, just to get what she wants."
"Yes. Or maybe they have not slept together yet, but, because
they want to force our hand, they will arrange a quickie. Who
knows?"
"So, why did you plan to bash Xuan's face?"
"I was too angry to think straight! But wait... there may be a
solution. First, we must make sure that they stay apart for the time
being. Then we can try to find out if that bastard Xuan has ruined
her yet. Once we know one way or the other, we can then decide
what to do-either marry our younger sister to him or lock her up."
"The first step is to kick that bastard Xuan out of the tailor shop and
forbid him to return. It will mean sacrificing a valuable employee."
"It also means that we will sacrifice a great social reformer for the
good of our old-fashioned family!"
"That's right! But, remember, it's our sacrifice that counts."
"Maybe I should tell Auntie Senior Clerk to ask him to stay here
with her."
"Great idea! But don't be too obvious about it."
As the couple returned to the tennis court, they saw the French-man's wife waving desperately from the corner window on the sec-ond floor. Imagining the worst, they ran into the house, dashed up
the stairs, and entered the room. It seemed that little Master Blessing
had sneezed four times in a row! Mr. Civilization comforted his aunt
by offering a handful of vague physiological explanations for the
extra sneeze. After she had calmed down, he sat down to contem-plate the problem of Red-Haired Xuan.
Hence, Xuan's efforts to ruin innocent Miss Snow's reputation
had been a complete success.
Before him lay a greater challenge: how to destroy the reputation
of a widow who was utterly faithful to her two husbands.
A Physiological Investigation
The Language of an Authentic Monk
Red-Haired Xuan Reforms Buddhism
While Dr. Straight Talk examined little Master Blessing on the sec-ond floor, Xuan remained downstairs in the servants' quarters. The
household staff was puzzled by his mysterious class background and
social rank, but they knew that their mistress looked up to Xuan, and
so they too treated him with respect. Indeed, Xuan's easygoing man-ner put them at ease. They liked the fact that he was unpretentious
and spoke the language of the common people; he often used popular
phrases such as "Damn it!" and "God-damn my mother's milk."
As with household employees everywhere, the maids and ser-vants spent their free time bad-mouthing their employers and ex-changing gossip about the foibles of the high and mighty.
"Rich people are so strange!" the driver said. "They make such a
huge fuss over nothing! She acts like the kid is going to croak, but
there's absolutely nothing wrong with him! What's the big deal? Can
you believe that they actually called a doctor? God only knows what
will become of that kid!"
Master Blessing's nanny joined in the class struggle.
"What about children from poor families! They don't even have
enough food to eat, and still they are not as sickly as that brat!
When they do come down with something, they find a way to cure
themselves!"
The cook was even more harsh. He put forth the theory that the
boy was, in fact, an ordinary human being and not a gift from
Heaven or Buddha. He suggested that the onset of puberty com-bined with an overly rich diet had induced changes in the boy's
blood and general constitution. He was merely experiencing ex-treme growing pains, a function of his remarkably precocious physi-cal development.
"Just take a look at him," he insisted. "Have you noticed how he
pretends to suckle Nanny's breast, just to cop a quick feel. 'No way'
indeed! He's just horny, like his mother. How about when he forces
Nanny to play horse so that he can mount her from behind. Give me
a break! Like mother, like son, if you ask me... "
"That's what I call a God-damned gift from Heaven!" said Xuan
sternly.
To save face the nanny tried to make an excuse for little Master
Blessing. "It's not true. He's just a little boy. He doesn't know what
he's doing."
"I know what the hell he's doing," the driver interjected. "I've
seen lots of children in my life. Kids today become perverts much
earlier than in the old days! Some even take lovers and go to broth-els! Even if he doesn't know what he's doing, he's gonna have to
marry someone soon if he keeps it up! How can he not be a pervert
with a depraved mother like that? He's not listless because he's
going to die... he's probably just thinking up really dirty thoughts.
Being a gift from Heaven has nothing to do with it... "
After expressing support for the driver's analysis, Xuan went up-stairs to consult with Dr. Straight Talk. When he entered the room,
the doctor and the gentle mother were standing nervously in front of
the naked boy, who was refusing to put his clothes on. The doctor
was stumped. Despite his mother's insistence that the boy was ill,
he could find nothing wrong with the child.
"Maybe he's right," said Mr. Civilization. "Maybe little Master
Blessing is not really sick."
This suggestion upset Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer; she was
afraid that it might bring bad luck to say such a thing out loud.
"Indeed!" Dr. Straight Talk agreed. "It is probably nothing more
than the onset of puberty. If you were to find him a wife-"
"You are correct Sir," Xuan butted in. "I have known many of
today's children."
Dr. Straight Talk extended his hand to Xuan as if meeting an old
confidant. Encouraged by Xuan's support, he began to pontificate
on various indelicate subjects. "Of course, of course! I am sure that
my esteemed colleague here is familiar with the theories of Freud.
Yes? Symptoms of the nervous system indicate problems with the
kidneys and can give rise to a host of peculiar conditions...
While Dr. Straight Talk's erudition surprised no one, Xuan's was
unexpected.
"We understand each other like brothers," Xuan responded. "No
need to explain."
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer could not follow Dr. Straight Talk's
diagnosis, but she understood enough to be annoyed that it failed to
highlight the fact that her son was a gift from Heaven and Buddha.
She sensed, however, that she was outnumbered and remained si-lent. Red-Haired Xuan signaled to Dr. Straight Talk that he wished
to consult with him in private. They moved over to the window. Although I am not the primary physician, I am quite familiar
with the boy and his condition. As a colleague, Sir, I feel it is my
duty to inform you that the boy is entering puberty. He often forces
his nanny to let him suckle her breasts like some sort of three-year-
old. But, in fact, he's just horny!"
Dr. Straight Talk put his forefinger to his lips and nodded in
agreement.
"Thank you very much, Sir! You have identified the physiological
crux of the matter. There is no avoiding the truth. Once again, Freud
provides the solution. The boy is exhibiting signs of early puberty
brought on by too much rich food, too many nice clothes, and exces-sive pampering of the body. These factors combine to enhance his
lechery. The problem is exacerbated by the particular environment in
which he lives. Wouldn't you agree, Sir?"
Xuan stared at the window. His ears had grown bored listening to
all the unfamiliar words, and eventually they stopped paying at-tention. At that moment several animals in the garden were engag-ing in the joys of procreation. There were a pair of doves coupling on
the roof and two pretty Japanese dogs circling each other hungrily
down in the yard. In the garden a rooster was mounting a hen. As
fate would have it, all these domestic animals were demonstrating
the miraculous logic of Yin and Yang simultaneously. Distracted by
the raunchy spectacle, Xuan ignored the doctor's question.
"Don't you think we ought to consider the significance of the
surrounding environment?" the doctor asked again.
"The surrounding environment?" Xuan responded in a dazed stu-por. "What surrounding environment?"
Dr. Straight Talk turned to see what Xuan was staring at. Seeing
the animal love fest, he grabbed Xuan's hand once again and shook
it vigorously. "My dear... dear friend! Once again you have put
your finger on an obscure but important factor influencing human
behavior. The evidence to which you allude supports our theory. Of
course, it is very dangerous for adolescents to be exposed to such
filth firsthand."
"We must change the surrounding environment immediately!"
said Xuan.
Dr. Straight Talk cleared his throat and, true to his name, an-nounced the diagnosis in a direct and dignified manner. "Indeed!
There is nothing else to say! My good friend and I have reached the
same conclusion. Mankind's greatest weakness has always been
lust! When a newborn baby suckles and caresses his mother's
breasts, lust is born! When a ten-year-old boy reaches puberty-"
"In spite of the fact that he is clearly a gift sent from Heaven and
Buddha," interrupted Xuan, "he is as susceptible to lust as any
normal person. He may even be more lustful!"
"There is no need for a cure because the boy is not sick!" the
doctor chimed in. "What he needs is to get married. If you're afraid
that it's too early, you must begin to prepare him... to educate
him. This will not be an easy task; it will take much care and pa-tience. But, if you have someone like my good friend here to help, it
can certainly be done."
"Auntie," said Mrs. Civilization, seizing the opportunity, "why
don't you ask Mr. Xuan to stay here and educate little Master
Blessing. He will protect the boy from the unhealthy surrounding
environment."
"We will do whatever the doctor orders," replied Mrs. Deputy
Customs Officer. "I will order a private room prepared for Mr.
Xuan."
The Civilizations left together with Dr. Straight Talk. Dr. Red-Haired Xuan stayed behind. With her mind at ease, Mrs. Deputy
Customs Officer issued a flurry of orders to the servants and retired
to her room. In the living room Red-Haired Xuan paced back and
forth, thinking to himself. Suddenly, he heard a voice ring out from
the hallway.
"Is anyone home?! Amitabha! Greetings, sir!"
When he turned around, Red-Haired Xuan found himself face to
face with a fashionable, modem, and surprisingly Europeanized
monk. He wore a dyed brown shirt made from Shanghai silk and a
pair of sandals with rubber heels. In his mouth Xuan noticed three
gold teeth. He was handsome and had an almost sensual look about
him.
"What can I do for you?" asked Red-Haired Xuan. "Please take a
seat!"
"With your permission... Sir, I am a poor monk who lives but
an ascetic and onerous existence. In addition, I am the publisher of a
newspaper called the Wooden Fish Drum. Amitabha!"
"The Wooden Fish Drum?" said Xuan in an amused voice. "Does it
educate the public about the proper kind of drumbeat to be played
when entertaining singing girls?"
The monk blushed. "Sir, a singing girl can also contribute to the
enlightenment of the spirit, as it is written in the Confucian Book of
Music. Monks who visit singing girls do not necessarily abandon
asceticism. Their musical diet remains strictly meatless, if you know
what I mean. They never stay overnight. You may recall the recent
case in which I, a poor monk, successfully sued a newspaper editor
who accused me of lewd behavior in a house of ill repute. Even the
laws of the Protectorate Government side with poor monks in these
matters!"
"No kidding? Really? That's terrific!"
"As you can see, although I am only a poor monk, I am not
without power. The Wooden Fish Drum counts among its patrons
many high mandarins, governors-general, residents superior, and
military officials. We have hung their giant portraits all over the
offices of our newspaper... Ah, Buddhism is so mysterious-so
deep and so lofty."
"How can a bunch of ascetic monks run a commercially competi-tive newspaper?" asked Red-Haired Xuan, zeroing in on a knotty
Buddhist dilemma.
"There is a good explanation," the monk replied. "You have heard
perhaps that a new Buddhist Association with its own newspaper
has been founded in our country. We were afraid that it would cut
into the popularity of our pagoda. Hence, we poor monks decided to
publish the Wooden Fish Drum in order to protect ourselves from the
competition."
With one mystery of Buddhism cleared up, Red-Haired Xuan
turned to another.
"So, you mean that monks today promote themselves and compete
with each other just like rival Kings of Venereal Disease Treatment!"
"Amitabha!" the monk responded enthusiastically. "As a matter
of fact, one King of Venereal Disease Treatment sits on the editorial
board of the Wooden Fish Drum! He has helped us to develop an
aggressive and broad-based advertising strategy. Do not think that,
just because we are monks, we do not know anything about journal-ism or pen wars! Secular journalists attack each other in print as
stupid, uneducated, and untalented, but we Buddhist journalists are
not afraid to expose the fact that our enemies are stricken with
scabies, herpes, leprosy, or loss of a major limb!"
"Wow!" said Xuan. "That must be great for your circulation!"
"It certainly is! Since I started the Wooden Fish Drum, our following
has expanded. The quantity of paper goods and money burned at our
alters is way up, as is the number of people who worship at our
pagoda. We have also seen significant growth in coffin donations and
the number of children consecrated by their parents. It is my sacred
duty as a monk to support the development of Buddhism. Our suc-cess in the face of such aggressive tactics by the new Buddhist Associa-tion testifies to the Buddha's support for our efforts... "
Red-Haired Xuan stood up and interrupted the monk.
"But why are you here, Brother? What do you want from us? I am
not going to buy the Wooden Fish Drum. I prefer the kind of drum that
you monks beat when you take in one of your so-called meatless
meals with singing girls."
The monk winked at Xuan. "No problem! If you are willing to
help promote the Wooden Fish Drum, to promote Buddhism, I mean,
then I... I tell you frankly-I am here for little Master Blessing, the
son of Buddha from the Perfume Pagoda... "
"What can you do for him, Sir?"
"I am a poor monk only. My role is to tend to his soul...
Amitabha!"
"And I am educating the boy's body and his mother's, tool" Xuan
said in a loud and dignified voice.
The monk scratched his ears casually and peered intently at Xuan.
"Pardon me, Sir," he said. "Would you mind telling me your name,
rank, and profession?"
"I am Me su Xuan," he said, adopting a tone of superiority. "I was
a student at the medical college and am now a tennis professor and
the director of the Europeanization Tailor Shop for modern women!"
"You must be very well connected, no?"
"That goes without saying!"
"Sir, I entreat you to assist this poor monk... If you can help us
to expand our base of support, we are prepared to offer you a 30
percent cut. Our business practices are completely legitimate, unlike
those of our unscrupulous competitors at that new Buddhist Associa-tion. If you help to promote our newspaper, to increase our pagoda's
base of support-"
"I can see that your idea of a religious life has several major
shortcomings that need to be reformed," Xuan interrupted. "If you
do not reform, you will not be completely up-to-date, and, if you are
not completely up-to-date, you will be eliminated. During this ultra-modern era, even the Buddha will perish if he does not evolve along
the path of civilization."
"That is true, sir! I can tell that you are a man of great learning and
experience. This poor monk could certainly use your help... For
example, if you were to advocate discretely on my behalf with Mrs.
Senior Clerk and little Master Blessing, my standing and authority in
their eyes will certainly be enhanced!"
"Yes, of course! But your group is not very skillful when it comes
to the bottom line! Just take a look at the new Buddhist Association!
They typically send a half-dozen monks and novices as fee-collecting
ritual specialists to every funeral. That's good business. If I agree to
help you, you must be willing to reform your old-fashioned ways!"
"The future of Buddhism lies in your hands, Sir! Amitabha!"
"In that case I insist on a 50 percent cut for my efforts."
"Please do not overcharge the Buddha. It is a grave sin."
Red-Haired Xuan slammed his fist down on the table. "In that case
I will put up my own money and use the Wooden Fish Drum as a front
only. I will take care of everything and let you have 20 percent."
The monk rubbed his hands together. "Oh, please do not be so
stingy with our pagoda. It is a grave sin."
They were still bargaining when Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer
entered the room. She had changed into a traditional robe in order to
meet the monk. "Amitabha! Greetings Venerable Teacher! Say hello
little Master Blessing, show him how well behaved you are."
Red-Haired Xuan sat silently as the fashionable monk waxed elo-quent, devising various expensive ceremonies and providing advice
to Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer about the kinds of offerings she
ought to make.
The Way of the World
A Faithful Female Friend
Damn, Doctor Xuan Gets Angry
Over the next several days intense discussions about Red-Haired
Xuan took place at the Europeanization Tailor Shop and the house of
Grandpa H6ng. Two rival cliques emerged, one that supported Xuan
and one that opposed him. The opposition, led by Mr. ILL, included
High School Graduate Tan and the wife of the horned senior clerk.
Among Xuan's supporters were the horned senior clerk, Miss Snow,
the wife of Mr. ILL, several of the seamstresses, and virtually all of
the tailors. Hence, the majority remained in Xuan's camp. Grandpa
H6ng, Grandma, and the Civilizations refused to take a public stand
either way, preferring instead to wait and see which clique was
ascendent-a prudent strategy given the murkiness of the situation.
Members of Mr. ILL's opposition party were pleased now that
Xuan spent all of his time at the house of Mrs. Deputy Customs
Officer. To them this meant that he was no longer around to soil the
reputation of the Europeanization Tailor Shop. Xuan's supporters,
on the other hand, worried that his absence from the shop would be
bad for business.
Rumors circulated among both groups about an impending mar-riage between Xuan and Miss Snow. There were suspicions that
Grandpa H6ng had planted the rumors (a practice common with
government officials) in order to gauge public opinion before coming
out in support of or opposition to the union. If such were the case,
the gambit failed because popular sentiment on the issue remained
starkly divided. While some sneered at Xuan's origins in the lower
classes, others praised him as a member of the common people.
Given the subtlety of the distinction between these two groups (the
lower classes and the common people), the debate raged on for
days.
"Victor Ban said that Red-Haired Xuan used to be a vagabond,"
his detractors would say.
"Dr. Straight Talk respects Mr. Xuan very much," countered his
supporters. "I've heard that they are close friends!"
"I know... What a pain! Shut up, already!" mumbled Grandpa.
"Let's not jump to conclusions," Grandma cautioned. "We should
first find out if our girl has really misbehaved."
"Mr. Xuan is only a boyfriend," Miss Snow insisted, adopting the
detached tone of a liberated woman.
For Mr. Civilization, Miss Snow's vague comments failed to con-vey a clear picture of the relationship between Xuan and his sister.
Moreover, he had long espoused the view that unfettered social
relations between men and women were a healthy sign of progress
and Europeanization. Were Mr. Civilization to raise an objection to
his sister's tryst, it might tarnish his progressive reputation. Hence,
although he did not support his sister, he dared not criticize her
behavior openly.
"Oh, to sow the seeds of civilization!" he complained self-righteously to himself. "What a heavy burden!"
In the meantime Xuan was juggling several jobs simultaneously:
tennis professor, mentor to Master Blessing, and special advisor to
Brother Tang Phu concerning the reform and renovation of Bud-dhism. In his free time he made brief visits to the Europeanization
Tailor Shop, where he liked to show off his erudition by critiquing
and commenting on the latest fashions in the presence of the custom-ers and staff. Mr. ILL's eyes reddened with rage as Xuan pointed out
flaws in his designs, scolded his workers, or flirted shamelessly with
his more fashionable female customers.
Sometimes he would stop by to ask a question. "Has Dr. Straight
Talk arrived yet?" On other occasions he might utter a single state-ment. "Joseph Thie't needs a favor done; he told me to meet him
here!"
Toward Miss Snow he was cold and formal. This hurt her but made
others think that they were in love and planning to get married.
The more people discussed the matter at hand the less they
agreed, and the more they argued the further they moved from the
truth. Such is the way of the world. In the end each side began to
doubt the veracity of its own arguments while growing simulta-neously to hate the opposing side even more intensely.
Among his proponents there was one person who was especially
grateful and committed to Xuan because of the support he had pro-vided to her in the past. That was Mrs. ILL.
One afternoon, after sharing a huge meal of dog meat with a
handful of devout monks, Xuan left the offices of the Wooden Fish
Drum and headed for home. Red-faced and reeking of liquor, he
happened unexpectedly upon the wife of Mr. ILL, who was out
walking alone in one of her traditional outfits. To Xuan she looked
miserable-the unlucky wife of a man dedicated to the progressive
reform of society, on the one hand, and the cruel preservation of
tradition within his own family, on the other.
"What have we here!" slurred Xuan drunkenly. "My a mi! Where
are you off to all by your lonesome?"
Mrs. ILL was pleased that Xuan had addressed her in this dar-ingly intimate and popular fashion. It had never happened to her
before! She cautiously peered around to make sure that the street
was deserted. Seeing that it was, she bravely and fashionably ex-tended her hand to Red-Haired Xuan.
"What luck!" she said breathlessly. "I was just going to look for
you, and here you are! I never see you at the Europeanization Tailor
Shop anymore."
"I have been terribly busy lately," Xuan replied with an air of
frivolous arrogance. ,;So much of my time these days is devoted to
the development of the world of sports in general and tennis lessons
in particular. I am also helping that utterly useless Dr. Straight Talk
to educate the son of Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer. In addition, the
head monk at the Lady Banh Pagoda has enlisted my help with his
newspaper, the Wooden Fish Drum. How can I refuse? I do not want
people to think that I am distant and unavailable! Therefore, I have
had to leave to Mr. ILL the important responsibility of reforming
society through custom-made clothes. I am sure you understand,
my friend?"
"Yes, my friend," replied Mrs. ILL, bravely addressing Xuan with
the same intimate pronoun. "I understand completely."
They began to walk together, side by side like boyfriend and
girlfriend.
"But is that the only reason that you, my friend, have stopped
coming by the Tailor Shop?" Mrs. ILL asked. "I trust we can be
honest with each other. Please do not be offended if I ask you a
question, my friend. Is it because of Miss Snow?"
"Idle gossip! Nonsense!" Xuan replied. "Miss Snow and I have
nothing but a platonic relationship... just like the two of us!"
"So, why does everybody say otherwise?"
"What do they say?"
"They say that Grandpa H6ng wants you, my friend, to marry
Miss Snow!"
Never before had Red-Haired Xuan heard such news, and it made
him extremely happy. Still, he tried to maintain an air of dispassion.
"That would be very dangerous if it were true! Of course, I would
have to find a way to politely decline such an offer!"
Xuan's statement shocked Mrs. ILL. "But how could you possibly
decline, my friend?" she retorted. "A woman like Miss Snow? Beauti-fuL very modern, and from a rich family? Were you to marry Miss
Snow, every well-educated young man in our country of Nam would
praise your prospecting skills! Not to mention that you two make
such a perfect couple!"
Mrs. ILL's comments pleased Xuan immensely. Suddenly, how-ever, he recalled Snow's conception of partial purity, as she had
explained and demonstrated to him at the Fairyland Hotel. Al-though he knew that Miss Snow would never give up her virginity
entirely before getting married, the idea of semi-virginity troubled
him. He sighed to himself. "So many loves! Alas!"
"It must be so hard for you to decide, my friend!" Mrs. ILL re-plied. "Of course, you must choose carefully... "
"What scares me most is the prospect of sprouting horns. If I were
to marry Miss Snow, my horns might grow so large that they could
be ground into a powder and sold as traditional medicine."
Mrs. ILL smiled to herself. She recognized at that moment that all
men are irrationally jealous-jealous of wind and shadows. Then
she recalled how Xuan had supported her when she had endeav-ored to dress in a modern way. She felt overcome with a sense of
gratitude.
"It seems that marriage-the so-called hundred-year knot-is not
yet a high priority for you, my friend. I wonder why so many people
are slandering and speaking ill of you in this regard... ?"
"Who? Whom do you mean?"
"I cannot name names. It will only breed more hatred and make
me into a tattletale. The important thing is for you to be aware that
such people are out there."
Ten more times Red-Haired Xuan asked for names but she re-fused to answer. Mrs. ILL was very proper indeed and hated the
idea that she might be thought of as a tattletale.
"My only duty is to let you know that you are being maligned and
slandered. It is said that you are from a lower-class family, that you
are uneducated, and that you once worked as a ball boy and as an
advertiser for venereal disease treatments. And that's not even the
worst of it."
Red-Haired Xuan paused for a moment. "How terrible!" he said
with a smirk. "If they dare to bad-mouth me like that, who knows
what they will say about other people? The nature of my background
and education are known to Mr. Civilization, Mrs. Deputy Customs
Officer, the senior clerk, Dr. Straight Talk, and you, my dear friend.
No doubt, those scurrilous rumors were spread by that bastard Victor
Ban! At least Miss Snow knows what sort of person I am."
"How did you know it was Victor Ban?" Mrs. ILL asked immedi-ately. "Indeed, it was he who told the story to Miss Snow's fiance
and who later confirmed it in a letter to Grandpa H6ng! The old man
is humiliated."
"Do you know why Victor Ban hates me? I once helped him to
open a drugstore back when I was in medical school. But I quit after
discovering that he was adding bits of clay to the venereal disease
medicine. Of course, he holds a grudge against me. I am not afraid
of his hateful lies... "
Once she had been reassured about Xuan's lofty educational and
social status, Mrs. ILL surmised that the time was right to tell Xuan
of an important matter concerning his honor. "My dear friend," she
began. "I have something important to tell you, but you must prom-ise to keep it secret. Grandma H6ng has ordered that any of her
relations who happen to meet you must immediately slap you or spit
in your face."
Xuan was shocked. "Spit in my face? Slap me? Me? Did I not save
the life of the most important old man in that family? Am I not the
main reason that the Europeanization Tailor Shop has prospered as
of late? That is how they choose to repay me? What a life... What
a... Please excuse me... what a God-damned life!"
"Oh no! Please no!" responded Mrs. ILL. "Do not be so hot-tempered!"
"I will go directly over to her house," said Xuan haughtily, "so
that she can spit in my face without delay!"
"No! I beg you!" she pleaded fearfully. "Please do not let them
know that it was I who told you!"
But Xuan was inconsolable. As a reckless and truly uneducated
man, he was unable to bear such a direct affront to his dignity. At
that point even a harmless joke could have provoked him to murder.
As Xuan's manner hardened, Mrs. ILL grew more and more fright-ened. He spun around and motioned to two rickshaw men. "Rick-shaw! Rickshaw! Hey, you two! Come quick!"
Mrs. ILL pleaded with Xuan, but he ignored her. The rickshaw
pulled up in front of them.
"Come along if you like," he said to her. "You'll see. I won't tell
anyone that it was you, my friend, who told me. Don't worry.
Maybe she won't really spit in my face."
Trembling with fear, Mrs. ILL got into the rickshaw. Thirty min-utes later they pulled up in front of Grandpa H'Ong's house. The two
passengers paid their drivers and entered the front door.
Everyone in Grandpa H'Ong's family was home. Great-Grandpa
was slurping down a bowl of swallow's nest porridge. Grandpa
H'Ong was smoking a pipe of opium, assisted by the opium servant.
Grandma, the Civilizations, Miss Snow, and High School Graduate
Tan were sitting together in the living room. Xuan greeted every-body, but his face was dark with anger. He approached the bed of
Great-Grandpa. "How are you, old man?" he said loudly. "Have you
been sick since I cured you? Have you needed another doctor?"
The old man stopped eating. "Thank you very much, Doctor," he
said. "I have felt fine ever since you cured me. I can't thank you
enough, Doctor!"
"That's fine. No need to thank me!"
Xuan walked into the outer room and approached Mr. Civiliza-tion. "Since I stopped coming over to help, is your shop still
crowded with customers?"
"Yes! yes!" replied Mrs. Civilization on her husband's behalf.
"And many women and young ladies often ask about you."
"What do they ask about me for?" said Xuan with mock surprise.
"I'm a nobody! A low-class vagabond! A lowly ball boy! Not even
worth spitting on!"
Grandma kept her eyes down. "My goodness!" she exclaimed,
looking up gingerly. "Who would dare talk like that! Why say such a
thing, Doctor? Why do you seem so unhappy? Has anyone in this
family wronged you in any way?"
Miss Snow was pleased that her mother had adopted such a con-ciliatory attitude. She whispered to Mr. ILL that it must have been
her ex-fiance and Victor Ban who had slandered Xuan.
Xuan paced angrily back and forth. "I'm waiting for someone to
spit at me or to slap me in the face!"
were furious. They longed to unmask
Xuan there and then but were afraid of damaging their younger
sister's reputation in front of the wife of Mr. ILL and the opium
servant. Instead, they stood there fuming. Grandma was puzzled by
all the conflicting developments: Xuan's anger, the fact that he had
saved Great-Grandpa's life, the fact that her daughter, Miss Snow,
was now in love with him, the letter from Snow's fiance. All of these
things confused her; she no longer knew right from wrong, good
from bad. "Please take a seat, Doctor," she said gently. "Who in this
family has said something against you?"
Xuan continued to pace back and forth. "If I get angry, it will
mean trouble for everyone! If I am wronged, everybody will suffer!"
No one dared to utter a peep, and the room fell silent. Xuan
paced back and forth across the floor for ten minutes. Only the
tapping of his shoes broke the silence. Just as his anger was begin-ning to dissipate, the horned senior clerk and his wife entered the
room, hand in hand. Xuan's mind jumped to the five piasters that
he owed Brother Tang Phu for one "vegetarian meal"... "Sir," he
announced loudly, "you are a horned husband!"
Everyone was startled as if zapped by an electric shock. The se-nior postal clerk grabbed his chest and fell to the floor, moaning.
"Oh my parents! What shame! Now everyone knows of my wife's
affair! The whole world knows! How shameful! How painful!"
Before Red-Haired Xuan realized the devastating effect of his
words, a loud, distressing hiccup erupted from under the mosquito
net of the old man's bed.
The family scurried in all directions. They divided into two
groups: one lifted up the old man, and the other lifted up the senior
clerk.
"Please! Oh Great Mandarin," Grandma implored Xuan. "Please,
help cure my old man."
The old man moaned as if he were going to die. "No need for a
cure! Just let me die! It is too shameful to live! If you want to cure
something, then please cure the reputation of my family that you
have sullied so!"
He hiccuped again. Tears welled up in Grandma's eyes. She
begged Xuan to help... The whole house turned to Xuan... In
the face of such a tragedy Xuan let down his guard. "It's true,
Grandma," he murmured in a soft and honest voice. "I am com-pletely uneducated. I was once a ball boy from a lower-class family. I
know nothing about medicine!"
Fast as a thief, Xuan exited the house and ran away.
Grandma was regretful, but others criticized Xuan for allowing
his hatred of the family to interfere with his professional duty. He
did not really deserve to be a doctor, they thought.
The Happiness of a Family in Mourning
The Contribution of Civilization
An Exemplary Funeral
Three days later the old man died.
In keeping with the theory that "too many cooks will spoil the
soup," the family spent the days prior to his death bringing in all
manner of quacks-Eastern quacks and Western quacks, old ones
and young ones. Xuan remained out of sight during Great-Grandpa's
demise, and, as a result, his medical reputation soared. Grandma sent
people to find him but to no avail. Without Dr. Xuan all hope was lost;
none of the real doctors could help the old man. When Dr. Straight
Talk learned that his colleague Dr. Xuan was avoiding the patient, he
also refused to take the case. Here was a lesson for those who dared to
say that Xuan was from an uneducated, lower-class family, that he
had been a vagabond and a ball boy... The herbalists Dr. Spleen and
Dr. Lung were also asked to treat the patient, but, like the other
respected doctors, they too refused. Another suggestion was to use
the sacred medicine from the Bia Pagoda. In a recent case mud and
buffalo shit taken from this source had been administered to patients
suffering from tuberculosis and typhoid, and both had died. A subse-quent investigation revealed that the sacred properties of the medi-cine had been falsely promoted by a band of village tyrants who had
recently embezzled from the public budget. Hence, the medicine was
no longer considered sacred. As a result of these various factors, the
old man, already well into his eighties, died peacefully. During the
chaos of his final days the opium servant calculated that Grandpa
H6ng said "I know, what a pain. Shut up already!" exactly 1,872
times.
Great-Grandpa's death made many people happy. Grandpa H6ng
told the horned senior clerk that he and his wife should expect to
receive at least several thousand piasters. The senior clerk was pleas-antly surprised that his invisible horns had proved so lucrative. He
credited Xuan's advertising skills for netting such a valuable profit
and planned to go into business with him in the future. If Xuan
could generate several thousand piasters by saying "Sir, you are a
homed husband!" imagine what he could make by saying "Sir, this
product is the best. It should be sold overseas!" He planned to meet
Xuan immediately so as to pay him the remaining five piasters that
he owed him. One must demonstrate the value of one's word, he
thought, before entering into business together.
Grandpa H6ng closed his eyes tightly and dreamed about how he
would soon be able to wear funeral clothes, lean on a funeral cane,
and cough, spit, and cry in public all at the same time. Everyone
would look at him and say, "Oh, look how old the eldest son is!"
Grandpa H6ng was very sure that the funeral and his funeral cane
would leave a great impression.
The main concern of Grandpa's son, Mr. Civilization, was that a
lawyer should witness the death of his paternal grandfather. This
would ensure that the old man's will would actually be carried out in
practice as opposed to existing solely in some theoretical nether-world. His only remaining worry was what to do with Red-Haired
Xuan. While it was true that Xuan had committed two mistakes-he
had seduced one of his younger sisters and denounced the lustful
indiscretion of his other one-he had, inadvertently perhaps, pro-voked the propitious death of the old man. Two small mistakes, one
big favor... how to react? Mr. Civilization rubbed his hands pen-sively through his hair. Fortunately, his puzzled visage resembled
the face of someone mourning the death of a family member.
In fact, a sense of puzzlement and anxiety reigned over the whole
affair. After the corpse was authenticated by the relevant authorities,
the deceased party was wrapped in a shroud and left idle for over a
day. Even though all the funeral plans had been long completed,
Grandpa H6ng did not order the ceremony to begin. The younger
generation-Grandpa's children and their spouses-began com-plaining about the slowness of the older generation. High School
Graduate Tan was restless-eager to use the cameras that he had
prepared for the occasion. Mrs. Civilization was anxious to wear her
fashionable new mourning clothes. This outfit (including the white
hat with black lace trim) had the potential to bring happiness to
many grieving family members despite the painful death of a loved
one. The delay of the funeral annoyed Mr. ILL because none of his
new mourning designs appeared in public and hence were not cov-ered in the press. Mr. Civilization was blamed for failing to intervene
to end the delay. Grandpa H6ng was criticized for closing his eyes
tightly and complaining about his "pain." Grandma was chided for
following the old traditions too closely and generally stirring up
trouble. The real reason for the delay was because of Miss Snow, or,
more precisely, because of what Red-Haired Xuan had done to Miss
Snow.
Grandma returned from Snow's fiance's house. In front of the
innocent eyes of the pious children and grandchildren waiting anx-iously to bury the corpse of Great-Grandfather, she gestured silently
for Mr. Civilization to follow her upstairs to Grandpa H6ng's room.
Grandpa had just finished his sixtieth opium pipe of the day. The
opium servant had stepped out for a moment, leaving the old man
to enjoy the residue of opium left in his lungs. Upon seeing
Grandma, he sat up. "What's going on, Grandma? Have they aban-doned the marriage?"
Grandma sat down quietly next to him. Mr. Civilization also took
a chair and sat down near the bed. "It's a dilemma," Grandma
sighed. "They have not given up the marriage. They haven't done
anything. The family is still coming here to express their condo-lences. How strange!"
"Why don't you tell them to move the wedding up before the
funeral?"
"They do not want to move up the wedding. What can I do?"
"Are they going to do it or not? Do they still plan to marry their
son to Snow, or do they think that she has been ruined? They must
have some opinion?"
"What do you think they are thinking?" Grandma asked Grandpa.
"You're the one who went to their house," Grandpa snapped.
"How come you're asking those of us who stayed home?"
Grandpa and Grandma continued to quarrel in a way common
among old, traditional couples from respectable families-families
in which husbands and wives never calmly discuss anything for
more than fifteen minutes.
"In my opinion, I don't think that they are convinced that Snow
has been ruined."
"No way! I think that they have always wanted to break up the
marriage. Don't side with your child!"
"Why do you think they still want to express their condolences?
Don't be stupid!"
"Perhaps it is some sort of trick! They do not cancel the marriage
now, but they do not plan to go through with it either. That way n o
one else will dare to ask Snow's hand in marriage. She will die an old
maid!"
"I'm not so sure! Maybe they are just as confused as we are. Even
we do not know for sure whether our daughter has been ruined or
not! When I told them that we should move the wedding date up
before the funeral to save money rather than wait for three more
years, they replied that their son is still young and only a student.
They see no need to rush the wedding. They said that they could
wait three or even five more years."
"So, what should we do now? I think we should ask Dr. Xuan to
marry her before the funeral. If he agrees, then everything will be
settled down."
Grandma bit her lip. She still remembered that Xuan had said, "If
I am wronged, everybody will suffer!" He had also called attention
to the horns of her son-in-law, the senior clerk, directly to his face,
an announcement that brought shame to her other daughter. Xuan's
hot temper was scary. She felt that she would be overcome with
shame in his presence. It would be an honor to have such a noble
son-in-law but also very frightening.
"There is an old saying," Grandma said, gesturing to her son,
'"Children are spoiled by their mothers; grandchildren are spoiled
by their grandmothers.' You have contributed to the ruin of Snow.
You have made us all look bad. Now I ask for your advice."
"Yes!" Grandpa nodded. "What do you think, toa? A grown-up
daughter at home is as dangerous as a bomb in the house. Toa
should think of a way to send the girl off somewhere. That will put
an end to our worries."
Mr. Civilization scratched his head and thought for a while. "I
don't know. People already think that she loves Xuan. If we marry
her off to Xuan before the funeral, aren't we admitting that she has
been ruined by him? I say we ignore the whole mess and take care of
the funeral first. Then, later on, if they still want their son to marry
Snow, we'll do it. Otherwise, we'll marry her to Xuan. What's the
rush?"
"Is it that easy?" Grandma asked. "Why did you say the other day
that you're not sure if Xuan will agree?"
"If I persuade him, he will agree," Mr. Civilization responded.
Grandpa H6ng liked the idea of having a son-in-law like Xuan.
Although he would have preferred everything settled then and
there, he voiced agreement with his son's plan. Mr. Civilization
furrowed his brow, trying to think of a way to wash away some of
the nastier blemishes from Red-Haired Xuan's past. It was the only
way to save face. While he had once been angry that so many people
misunderstood Xuan in the past, this fact was now a source of so-lace. As with many fashionable men who made mistakes, he pre-ferred to patch up what could be fixed rather than going through the
embarrassment of admitting an error.
"Please do not worry, Mother and Father," he said, rising to his
feet. "I will arrange an honorable marriage for Snow. Now, we
should hold the funeral before it's too late."
The three descended the stairs and started to make arrangements
for the funeral. The children and grandchildren were happy and
pleased... Merrily, they went off to deliver the obituary, to order the
clarinetists, and to rent the funeral cart. Many guests arrived to pay
their respects, to make ritual offerings, and to express condolences.
The funeral began at exactly seven the next morning. Two police-men from the eighteenth precinct, Min toa and Min da, were hired
to maintain order. They were pleased to get the work, since there
had been few people to fine as of late, and they had begun to re-semble businessmen on the verge of bankruptcy. Everyone in the
family of the deceased seemed content, with the exception of Miss
Snow. Why hadn't Xuan made ritual offerings? Why hadn't he at-tended the funeral? Had he lost respect for her? These questions
nagged at Miss Snow; they made her so miserable that she thought
of suicide. A needle pierced her heart as she looked in vain for her
boyfriend among the crowd of mourners.
On the day of the funeral Miss Snow wore the outfit Innocence-a long, see-through dress over a bra with black lace trim that re-vealed her underarms and the top half of her breasts. She also wore
a pretty mourning hat. With so many rumors swirling around about
the defilement of her honor, Miss Snow selected Innocence to pro-vide some reassurance that she had not lost her virginity completely.
Carrying a small tray, she wandered among the crowd offering betel
nuts and cigarettes. Her face looked vaguely sad and romantic, a
fashionable mourning pose for the time. Close friends of Grandpa
H6ng crowded around the coffin. Their jaws were covered with
beards-long ones, short ones, black, red, and brown ones, some
sparse, some dense, and some curly. Their faces were all set off by
large pairs of ears. On their chests were dozens of medals: the Le-gion of Honor, the Imperial Medal, the Cambodian Medal, and the
Ten Thousand Elephants Medal. They were moved by the mournful
tones emanating from the clarinets and by the glimpses of Miss
Snow's white arms and breasts that they managed to catch through
her see-through dress.
Given the mixture of Vietnamese, Chinese, and French traditions
on display, the funeral resembled a large festival. There was a large
house made from paper and bamboo, a roasted pig under an um-brella, and a trumpet. There were scores of wreaths and at least
three hundred banners displaying parallel couplets. Led by High
School Graduate Tan, a handful of amateur photographers took pic-tures. There were hundreds of people there. Such a big funeral
could almost bring a smile to the lips of the corpse in the coffin!
During the funeral procession Mr. ILL, his wife, Mrs. Deputy
Customs Officer, and Mr. Joseph Thie't criticized Xuan's failure to
make an appearance. As they passed the fourth intersection, the
procession came to an abrupt halt as if stalled at a traffic accident.
From one of the cross-streets six carts, each carrying a large umbrella
and a team of monks from the Lady Banh Pagoda, merged into the
procession right behind the flag carriers. Two huge mourning
wreaths, one from the Wooden Fish Drum and one from Xuan himself
were added to the procession. High School Graduate Tan hurriedly
snapped several pictures before running back to inform his mother.
Grandma ran forward, very moved by the fact that the wreaths were
from Xuan, the famous doctor and advisor to the Wooden Fish Drum.
It greatly enhanced the solemnity of the funeral.
"Thank Goodness for Mr. Xuan," she exclaimed. Otherwise, our
funeral would have been small and inadequate!"
Brother Tang Phu sat contentedly upon one of the carts. He was
certain that his presence there would be seen as a victory for the
Wooden Fish Drum and as a defeat for the new Buddhist Association.
After making sure that all his arrangements had been carried out
correctly, Red-Haired Xuan joined the funeral procession. Miss Snow
gazed at him lovingly, her face radiating gratitude. As usual, he was
the object of intense praise and bitter jealousy.
The funeral procession made a strong impression wherever it
went. It seemed that the whole city took notice of its size and pomp.
It was just as Grandpa H6ng had wished. Mr. ILL and Mrs. Civiliza-tion were especially pleased with the public attention showered on
the funeral fashions of the Europeanization Tailor Shop. Grandma
was relieved that, far from being angry, Dr. Xuan had helped to
make the funeral among the biggest and most honored in recent
memory.
The funeral continued...
Vietnamese, Chinese, and French clarinets played on in tum. The
mourners maintained somber expressions, all the while whispering
excitedly to each other about their wives and their children, about
the new houses and furniture they had purchased, or about the new
clothes that they had had made. A large number of the mourners
were young, fashionable lady friends of Miss Snow, Mrs. Civiliza-tion, Mrs. Sunset, and Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer. There were all
sorts of fashionable men and women-flirting, courting, gossiping,
teasing, arranging trysts, and making each other jealous-all the
while maintaining the appropriately sorrowful expressions of mourn-ers at a funeral. Interspersed with the requisite sobs and barbs that
ring out at any funeral, the following whispered sentences were also
overheard. "To whose family does that pretty girl belong? The one
next to her is even hotter! Yes, yes, that bastard is a real creep!-
Didn't his wife leave him?-Two husbands already!-She's not too
old!-Those breasts look awfully French!-Can't you fix me up with
her?-Did you say a gold mine or lead rnine?-No more dates at
all?-The wife is so fat, and the husband is so skinny. I see horns for
him in the future!"
The funeral continued...
When the coffin was lowered into the tomb, High School Gradu-
ate Tan, in his long white mourning gown, forced each person to
lean this way or that, to bend backwards or forwards, and to strike
certain poses so that he could capture their presence at the moment
the coffin was lowered into the ground. His friends jumped up and
down on the surrounding tombs to get shots from different angles.
Holding his hat in his hand, Red-Haired Xuan stood solemnly
next to the horned senior clerk. When Grandpa H6ng coughed and
spit and cried and fell unconscious to the ground, the horned senior
clerk began to wail:
"Wa!... Wa!... Wa!"
Everybody remarked on the good behavior of the nephew-in-law.
The horned senior clerk cried so much that he almost fainted, and
Xuan had to help him up. But, despite his best efforts, Xuan could not
hold him straight. In his huge white turban and long white mourning
gown, the senior clerk continued to wail. "Wa!... Wa!... Wa!... "
Red-Haired Xuan wanted to release him. Suddenly, he felt the
senior clerk slipping a folded-up five piaster note into his hand. He
held it so that no one could see it. Then he went to look for Brother
Tang Phu, who was lost among the three hundred mourners.
A Glorious and Happy Misunderstanding!
Red-Haired Xuan Conquers the Police
Mr. Civilization caught a glimpse of Xuan. "The bastard looks less
like a vagabond everyday," he thought to himself. "Clothes and food
really make a difference. Now, how to approach this? How to make
him register his name at the General Department without causing a
fuss? How to explain that, since I plan to marry my sister to him, I
need to elevate him from a lowly ball boy to a tennis amateur?
Perhaps I should just be straight with him?"
As he was mulling all this over, Xuan opened the gate and ex-tended a hand. "What's up? Madame Senior Clerk has taken little
Master Blessing to the Lady Banh Pagoda to request a written good
luck prayer."
"Are you busy?"
"I'm free as a bird. By the way, your wife's game is getting better
every day."
Mr. Civilization ignored the compliment. "You should go upstairs
and change into some decent clothes," he said abruptly. "We've got
somewhere to go and important work to do!"
"What is it?"
"Don't ask. Just go change your clothes."
Civilization waited ten minutes before Xuan returned, properly
attired. Xuan's old boss called two rickshaws but did not reveal their
destination to him. Xuan had no idea where they were going.
"Hey, what about the rumor that you ruined my sister? We're
going to clean up this sordid mess right now!"
Red-Haired Xuan was scared. He imagined that they were off to
the Police Station, the Department of Counter-Espionage, or the
Court, where he would be locked up and subjected to unspeakable
tortures as punishment for ruining a respectable girl from a good
family. He paused for a moment before the rickshaw.
"Maybe the bastard won't marry my younger sister," Mr. Civiliza-tion thought to himself. "Or maybe they've done nothing together,
and all the rumors are nonsense."
"I have made a horrible mistake, Monsieur," Xuan blurted out,
interrupting Civilization's train of thought. "I want to apologize.
Snow loves me, and I love Snow. If you try to keep us apart, it will
kill us. We have been together already."
Mr. Civilization was shocked. There was no longer any doubt
about it! His younger sister had been ruined! If Snow did not marry
Xuan, then nobody would marry her! There was nothing to do now
but to try to save as much face as possible.
"It's no matter," he said resolutely. "We can solve this. But first we
have to make you more respectable. I want you to register your
name at the General Athletic Department as an amateur tennis
player. Then you will be able to compete for the championship
against the top players in all of Tonkin. I want my younger sister to
marry an athlete, not a ball boy."
"So, we're going to the General Athletic Department?"
"Yes! I am a progressive person. I do not distinguish between the
different classes! As a devoted sports fan, I first recognized your
potential athletic value to our country and decided to rescue you on
the day you were fired. Isn't that right? Since you've been working
for us, your social status has gradually improved. Today you are a
different person. It is no accident that you fell in love with my
sister!... It was probably predestined. In any case, I always in-tended for my sister to marry you. It is only because of my efforts
that you have become what you are today!"
Xuan's image of the General Athletic Department contrasted
agreeably with what he knew of the Police Station, the Department
of Counter-Espionage, and the Court. Still, he recalled his inglorious
past and felt himself unfit to be Snow's husband. He thought it best
to refuse Civilization's offer. "Monsieur, Snow only loves me be-cause you once jokingly told Great-Grandfather that I was a medical
student. It will be a terrible mistake for Snow to marry me. I will be
deceiving an honorable girl."
Xuan's words made Civilization ashamed. He had caused a huge
injustice, all on account of a harmless white lie. "No matter!" he
said, trying to assuage his own guilt. "You actually do know some-thing about medicine. But, because diplomas mean everything in
this old-fashioned society, I had to stretch the truth a little. It doesn't
matter if you are a medical student or not, I still want you to marry
my sister."
"You are too kind, Monsieur," Xuan replied sadly. "But I urge you
to reconsider! Snow is beautiful, rich, and from a modem and culti-vated family. As you know, I was orphaned during my childhood. I
worked as a ball boy and sold roasted peanuts on the street. I did
many lowly jobs. I do not deserve her."
Mr. Civilization frowned. "Tricky bastard!" Mr. Civilization
thought to himself. "Why does he needle me like this? A dowry
like my sister's, and still he holds out for more! I guess he's after
some sort of guarantee, the greedy bastard!"
"It's no matter! There are no lowly jobs, only lowly people. Take
me, for instance; I have the mind of a common person. And I would
love nothing more than to have a common, younger brother-in-law
like you. Moreover, Snow has her own fortune. You will not have to
worry about hard work anymore if you agree to marry her. You can
concentrate on promoting sports in our nation for the remainder of
your life."
Xuan remained unconvinced. "No, I dare not accept. Please recon-sider your offer."
"Monsieur," Mr. Civilization replied threateningly, his voice ris-ing in anger, "this is a matter for your conscience! You have ruined
the reputation of a girl from a respectable family. I want to solve this
problem. It may bode ill for your future if you refuse to help me."
The threat scared Xuan. "Yes, yes," he replied meekly, "I will do
whatever you think is best."
Mr. Civilization sighed. He was overcome with a sensation of
happiness and relief, commonly felt among people who succeed in
forcing others to marry against their will. Satisfied that the marriage
would go forward, he motioned for Xuan to get in the rickshaw.
Arriving at the General Athletic Department, Red-Haired Xuan
felt the road to fame and success opening wide before him. The
driveway was full of beautiful cars. Elegantly clad Vietnamese and
French men entered and exited along with fashionable Vietnamese
ladies and French madames. They all exuded the luxurious air of the
upper classes. Xuan knew that he had truly arrived. Oh, sports!
Glorious sports! What can't you accomplish? Hip hip hooray!
As his mind raced with various lofty ideas about the future of our
race, Mr. Civilization led him to a large, solenm-looking office. On
the walls were paintings of tennis and boxing matches, fencing
contests, swimming races, pole vaulting tournaments, bicycle com-petitions, racing cars, round footballs, and not-so-round footballs.
Many people approached Mr. Civilization and Red-Haired Xuan to
shake their hands. As conversations unfolded noisily in French, a
look of scorn and annoyance passed over Xuan's face. His expression
suggested a profound reverence for the mother tongue and resent-ment toward those who used French when it was unnecessary. The
French speakers seemed equally annoyed with Xuan's attitude.
Mr. Civilization thought it best to introduce Xuan immediately.
"Messieurs, this is my friend Xuan, a tennis professor. He is here to
register on the list of tennis amateurs. He is a great hope for
Tonkin."
One of the intellectuals turned to Xuan and addressed him at
some length in French. Xuan pursed his lips in disgust. "Please,
Sir," he retorted sternly, "isn't our language good enough for you?"
"Yes, of course, please forgive me!" the man replied sheepishly,
acknowledging his disrespect to the mother tongue. "Sir, I have long
heard your name and am pleased to have the honor of meeting you
at last."
Xuan bowed his head. "I am honored!"
"Thank you very much, Sir! I have seen you play many times, and
I admire you. You have a bright future. We have been worried that
Tonkin has no one who can compete against Annam and Cochin-china, but now we are fortunate to have you. Our Majesty will be so
pleased if you defeat the champions of Annam and Cochinchina and
go on to represent Indochina in Siam."
"I long for nothing more."
They shook hands solemnly and said good-bye. As the director of
the General Athletic Department had yet to arrive, everyone took
the opportunity to make the acquaintance of everyone else. Hence,
Xuan was able to meet a wide range of amateur tennis players,
including several sons of province chiefs and governors. Everyone
declared that they "hoped to have the honor" of playing against
Xuan for the championship in the near future. He was inundated
with praise and compliments. Those confident of defeating him dis-played a false modesty, while those who were afraid they would lose
to Xuan were careful not to offend him.
Sports reporters from three daily newspapers vied to interview
him. The fact that a tennis professor-a tennis professional, in
other words-had registered his name on the amateur list was big
news in sporting circles. Civilization knew that he had to promote
Xuan's reputation carefully, so he remained by his side like a faith-ful dog beside its master. He was afraid that he would lose face
if Xuan made an embarrassing gaffe. But Xuan was cautious,
well behaved, and maintained the scornful visage of a genuine
member of the upper classes. When faced with a difficult question,
Xuan simply smacked his lips, clicked his tongue, and gestured
haughtily to Mr. Civilization. "Please, my manager will answer that
question."
The arrangement was not without benefits for Civilization. When-ever journalists took Xuan's photo as "the hope of Tonkin," they
allowed his manager to stand next to him in the picture.
Striking a pose often adopted by talented and confident men,
Xuan would occasionally tap Civilization on the shoulder and whis-per intimately into his ear:
"You will ride my coattails to fame and
success just like the managers of Chim and Giao before you! Thanks
to me, you will also become a household name."
Mr. Civilization realized that what Xuan said was probably true,
even though it was he who was masterminding Xuan's reputation.
After signing his name in the register in front of a handful of
French men and the chairman of the Athletic Council, Xuan and his
manager completed a final round of handshakes and sauntered out
of the office. Turning a corner, they ran smack into two policemen. It
was like a head-on collision between automobiles. Immediately,
Xuan recognized the two officers as Min dO' and Min toa from the
Eighteenth Precinct. One of the officers opened his notebook and
took out a pencil to write a ticket. "We entered on the right side. But
you two Monsieurs entered on the left. Names please?!"
"That's crazy!" Civilization protested. "There is no such law. We
are inside a building, not out on the street. You can't fine us in here!"
"Nice try, but you Messieurs are guilty of hitting officers of the
state and of preventing us from carrying out our work... "
Red-Haired Xuan thrust his chest forward. "I am Me sir Xuan,
tennis professor. I am the great hope of Tonkin!"
The policemen looked hesitantly at each other. After a moment
one thrust his own chest forward. "I am Me sit Min dO', an officer of
the fourth rank and owner of a victory medal. I won first prize in the
Tour de Hanoi-Ha Dong and second prize in the Tour de Hanoi-D
Son. I represent the future of the police."
The other officer followed his friend's example. "I am Me sit Min
toa, an officer of the fifth rank and winner of the first prize in the
Hanoi-Nam Dinh Cup, the Laundry Boy Cup, and the Melia Jaune
Cup. I represent the glory of the Hanoi Police and a great hope of
Indochina!"
Transfixed by their own credentials, the officers stood there in
silence, forgetting to write the tickets.
"I guess good policemen need this sort of background," Mr. Civili-zation said encouragingly.
"We need no other training," one of the officers said in agree-ment. "We have sixteen streets to patrol day and night. Our training
regimen is even more rigorous than that of B6ng and C6ng!"
"And our bicycles are completely normal," the other officer
added. "We practice ru-lfp in crowded streets! It prepares us for
long-distance races. Since we rarely write tickets, bicycle training
helps us to overcome our boredom! Long live sports! Long live the
police!"
"It seems that we all are comrades!" said Red-Haired Xuan, nod-ding his head.
"Quite right! Quite right!" the officers responded in unison. "But
we can still write you a ticket!"
"We are all working for the future of sports and the glorification of
our race!" Xuan said.
"That goes without saying, but it is irrelevant!"
"On the contrary. Our recent collision was little more than a sport-ing accident. How can you write a ticket for a sporting accident?"
The officers hesitated. They looked at each other, trying to deter-mine whether Xuan's comment was strictly legal.
"Forget about it," Xuan continued. "Soon we will be sitting to-gether at the emperor's banquet for sports champions. How can you
even consider writing us a ticket? It's heartless!"
"This whole thing is absurd," yelled Mr. Civilization. "It's illegal
to write such a ticket. We have broken no law!"
Officer Min toa waved his hand.
"We're policemen, for goodness sake! Our concern is tickets, not
laws! Only ordinary people worry about transgressions of the law,
not officers of the state! If you say that we are violating the law, you
are interfering with the duty of state officers!"
"You make perfect sense," said Red-Haired Xuan. "But enough
already! You must be here to register your names?"
"Yes, for the Ha Noi-Tourane Sa Majeste Cup!"
"Then we are all in this sporting village together. We are all glorify-ing our race. If you write us a ticket, we will become enemies. It is
better to be friends. We should help each other! We should promote
each other!"
"How do you mean?"
"You will spread the word that I am a talented tennis player, the
great hope of Indochina... " And what about us?" the officers asked.
"We will tell everyone that you are the best cycling officers
around; that you always carry out your duties diligently, maintain
law and order in the city, and that you will certainly win the Tour de
Hanoi-Saigon. And we will insist that you deserve promotions...
How does that sound?"
The officers nodded, shook hands with Civilization and Xuan,
and put away their tickets. They had fulfilled their duties as police-men and followed the law to the letter.
The Fiance
A Rape Case
An Official Investigation
My darling!" exclaimed Miss Snow. "I am so happy! Who could
have imagined that our marriage plans would succeed so easily? I'm
so happy I could just die! I want to commit suicide!"
Oblivious to the romantic and poetic dimensions of her state-ment, Xuan frowned deeply. "Suicide! We are about to get married,
and you want to commit suicide?!"
Miss Snow pointed to the White Bamboo Lake. "If we were to jump
to our deaths together into those silvery waves, the country would
talk forever about our passionate love affair. But never mind-I'm
only joking. Your frightened expression pleases me; it means that you
truly love me."
"How difficult you are, my dear," Xuan snapped in reply. "Who
could indulge you more than I!"
They set off on a leisurely walk. It was eight in the morning, but
the sun had yet to appear through the dense layers of white clouds.
Perhaps it did not want to disturb the young lovers. The wind blew
gently. Xuan and Miss Snow had planned a classic tryst: a lengthy
walk along Old Fish Road. Xuan related the whole story about how
Mr. Civilization had insisted that he marry Miss Snow. Although
this hurt her self-esteem a little, she was still happy. Given that
Xuan had actually been forced to marry her, Miss Snow's suicidal
impulse was indeed appropriate. Both Xuan and Snow were very
content.
"My darling Snow," Xuan said dreamily, "do you know why I fell
in love with you?"
"Because I am so honest?"
"Because you are so silly. You relied on me to ruin your respect-able reputation. Why did you place such trust in me?"
Miss Snow shrugged her shoulders. "Because I am honest! Remem-ber when I allowed you to check whether I used rubber breasts?"
"That's right! Thanks to those rubber breasts, we came to appreci-ate each other's honesty! Our happiness is the result of those rubber
breasts-the rubber breasts of social reform...
/1
Miss Snow shrieked with joy. "Long live Europeanization! Long
live rubber breasts!"
Suddenly, Miss Snow spied something in the distance that made
her frown. It was a young man running toward them wearing tradi-tional clothes: a turban, a floor-length silk gown, and a pair of old-fashioned shoes. Miss Snow stamped her feet in annoyance.
"It's my old fiance, the one I rejected to marry you. He probably
wants to quarrel with me! I really don't want to see him. I'll let you
handle this. Go ahead and teach him a lesson. I'll wait for you at
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer's house. We'll talk later."
Miss Snow turned and flagged a rickshaw. Xuan nodded good-bye to her. Then he folded his arms and waited for the quarrel to
begin.
The young man approached Xuan and greeted him with his
hands together, in the manner of a traditional Confucian scholar.
Red-Haired Xuan dismissed the gesture. "How old-fashioned! Not
evolved at all! Sports! Social reform!"
The young man was both frightened and angry. "Sir... , he
stammered, "Permit me to introduce myself... I am the fiance of
Miss Snow, the one who just ran away!"
Red-Haired Xuan bowed his head. "I am honored," he said, puff-ing out his chest. "I am Me sit Xuan, tennis professor, the hope of
Tonkin!"
The young man recognized that Xuan had seized the upper hand.
"It is I who am honored! Forgive me for disturbing you, Sir. Even
though you are talented, you should not try to harm other people. If
I am not mistaken, you are in the process of stealing my wife. Please,
Sir. I am not famous. I have no talent. Where is the victory in defeat-ing me?"
Red-Haired Xuan unleashed one of his now famous second-hand
speeches on the young man. "You... are unfashionable and old-fashioned! You are unreasonable! I am a member of the Europeaniza-tion Movement. The future fate of our nation-whether it evolves
toward civilization or descends into barbarity-lies in my hands!
Never mind what those old-fashioned moralists say! We do not only'reform the outside'! Our society will progress according to the basic
laws of evolution. During this deeply reformist era, everything con-servative will be eliminated! You are not Europeanized enough! You
are an obstacle along the road of evolution! Sports... Race...
Health! What is family happiness if not the happiness of husbands
and their wives?"
"But... I am also from a decent family," the young man replied.
"I have a diploma from a good secondary school. In terms of family
background, I am the son of a senior clerk and the grandson of a
district chief... I am more than a suitable match for Miss Snow.
Why has she changed her attitude toward me so?"
"But are you from a common family?" Xuan replied tersely. "Do
you have a popular background? How strange you are! You do not
understand contemporary mores! Don't you know what is fashion-able today?"
The young man seemed embarrassed! Not only were his clothes
old-fashioned, but his background was unfashionably respectable!
Everything about him was wrong.
Before he could muster a response, Xuan raised his hand and
continued:
"I am from a lower-class family! In the past I sold roasted
peanuts on the street and Tiger Balm aboard the trains. I even
worked as an errand boy for the theater! And still I am able to marry
Grandpa H6ng's daughter! What do you think of that?"
Xuan's statement frightened the jilted fiance. He guessed that
Xuan was sarcastically repeating the baseless rumors spread about
him by Victor Ban. In fact, he imagined, Xuan must come from an
extremely exalted background. The young man squirmed painfully
like a worm under a boot. "If you insist, Monsieur, I will concede.
But, as a man of honor, I must warn you that we are now life-and-
death rivals. Do not forget it!"
The young man bowed politely and left. His threat troubled Red-
Haired Xuan, who stood mulling it over for several minutes. He
hailed a rickshaw and returned home, where his betrothed awaited
him. A sense of contentment returned to Xuan after he reflected on
the lesson that he had just taught the young man. The life-and-death
rivalry was not worth worrying about, he surmised, because of the
great difficulty involved in actually killing someone.
When he arrived home, it was 10:00 A. M. and Miss Snow was
leafing through a photo album, waiting for him. Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer and little Master Blessing had yet to wake up. Xuan was
happy for the respite, even if it was only for a half-hour. Now he
could talk to his girlfriend without fear of being disturbed.
"Did you teach him a lesson, my darling?"
"Of course. I explained, with perfect logic, why he has no hope
with you. I showed him that it is pure folly for him to compete with
me! It turns out that he is not an unreasonable person. In the end he
accepted our wedding plans and wished us a hundred years of
happiness!"
"He wished us happiness?"
"Yes! He said:'It is better that Snow marries you than me...
Because I love Snow, I only want to see her happy."'
Miss Snow jumped up and embraced Xuan around the neck. "You
deserve a thousand kisses as a reward!"
Red-Haired Xuan stepped forward to receive his hard-earned and
well-deserved kisses. "Now... " he whispered in her ear. "I...
want to truly ruin your life!"
Miss Snow pursed her lips in a manner so moral she appeared
truly beyond reproach. "Hey! Hey! Forget it! You know that I am still
a romantic."
Miss Snow pushed Xuan aside. "Careful," she whispered, "or
we'll be caught red-handed!"
Xuan shook his head. "Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer and her son
are still sleeping."
"What about the servants?"
"They are in the back of the house! Quiet. Please permit me to
love you. You should be more obedient... "
Fearing that she would be considered disobedient, Miss Snow
relented, and they moved to the di vang. Miss Snow closed her eyes.
l. Divan (sofa).
Her expression suggested that she was dreaming about how the
cancellation of her previous engagement and the recent revolution
in her petty, old-fashioned family was about to bring her a great dose
of individual happiness. At that moment she longed to write a novel
about her life to provide an example for liberated women in the
future.
Suddenly, the door swung open, and Mrs. Deputy Customs Offi-cer rushed in, an angry expression on her face. The lovers were
startled and released each other. When had she awakened? Mrs.
Deputy Customs Officer was still in her sleeping gown. She poked
her finger in Miss Snow's face like a jealous wife. "Is my house a
brothel? Do you know that you are dirtying my house, Miss? Do you
know that your behavior is loose and immoral? Get out of my house
immediately! You bring shame upon me!"
Appropriately embarrassed, Miss Snow got up and left.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer turned to Xuan. "How can you be
so thoughtless? Don't you know what a bad thing you've done?
How dare you try to ruin the life of a decent girl like that?"
Xuan shrugged his shoulders. "What I was doing was for the
benefit of that decent girl!"
"Benefit?"
"Yes! Snow is my fiancee! Yesterday Mr. Civilization insisted that I
marry her! It is you who are damaging our honor!"
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was struck dumb like a wooden
statue. Her sleeping gown, however, revealed as much as if she had
actually been nude. The seductive image exerted a strange obsessive
power over Xuan, who was already angry and excited. In search of
release he grabbed the faithful widow and held her in a tight embrace.
Meekly attempting to maintain her fidelity toward her two ex-husbands, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer uttered a few words of
protest before being pulled down to the couch. "Hey, Mr. Xuan!
Why are you acting so funny?"
But at that moment our Red-Haired Xuan did not care about pro-priety or morality. He was determined to get some release and so
pretended to be deaf. Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer moaned but in a
low voice, like a faithful widow.
"Oh my goodness! It's killing me! I'm being raped!"
Outside the door screams echoed out. "No way! No way!"
Little Master Blessing rushed downstairs. Mrs. Deputy Customs
Officer stopped moaning. "Don't worry. He's just looking for his
nanny!"
She continued to moan but softly, so as not to be interrupted. "It's
killing me! Oh my neighbors and my fellow villagers! I am so miser-able! Please help me!"
Five minutes later there was a knock at the door. The two hur-riedly arranged their clothes and moved to chairs in different comers
of the room.
"Come in," Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer said in a loud, dignified
voice.
In walked Officers Min dO' and Min toa. They were followed by
little Master Blessing's nanny and the cook.
"Madame," said one of the officers, "we have been called to res-cue you!"
"What? Who called policemen into this house? Why do I need to
be rescued? Was it the nanny or the cook? Oh, you are both so
insolent!"
The cook blanched.
"But Madame," he stammered, "when little Master Blessing
called me upstairs, I heard someone moaning. I was frightened."
"We were out on the street when he called us in!" Min toa
explained.
"Moaning? Oh yes! I was reading a detective story aloud for the
teacher here to listen to," replied the quick-witted Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer.
Officer Min dO' laughed heartily. "That's funny! We thought some-one was being raped!"
The mistress turned angrily to her servant. "If you make a mistake
like that again, I will cut your god-damned throat! You stupid pig!"
"How god-damned insolent!" Xuan added.
Everyone stared uneasily at each other. To break the tension,
Red-Haired Xuan introduced the two policemen to the still-dignified
mistress.
"Allow me to introduce Officer Min dO', a policeman of the fourth
rank and recent winner of the Medal of Victory. He earned first prize
in the Tour de Hanoi-Db SO'n and second prize at the Tour de
Hanoi-Ha Dong. He represents the future of the police!... And
here we have Officer Min toa: winner of the Laundry Boy Cup and
the Melia Jaune Cup. He is the glory of the Hanoi Police and a great
hope of Indochina!"
The officers then dutifully introduced Xuan to Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer. "This is Monsieur Xuan, a tennis professor and the
hope of Tonkin!"
Xuan feared it would be impolite if no one introduced Mrs. Dep-uty Customs Officer. "Permit me to introduce Mrs. Senior Clerk, a
woman who remains faithful to her two ex-husbands, a kind mother
and great patron of the world of sports!"
Everyone was pleased. The two officers, however, were still a
little disappointed that they had been unable to carry out their du-ties. "We were called to investigate a rape case!" explained one of the
officers. "But it appears that nothing has transpired. It is not right to
toy with officers of the state. We do not come here for nothing!"
"Madame," added the other officer, "you must understand the
nature of our responsibilities. Although we would like to'live and
let live'... we have wasted valuable time and energy rushing over
here. We need to write some kind of ticket. It is not acceptable to
disturb officers of the state. If there is no rapist to punish, at least
allow us to ticket you for letting your dog run in the street without a
leash."
Eager to put the case behind her, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer
nodded her assent. "It's up to you."
It was an agreeable resolution for all involved. Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer retained her reputation for unswerving fidelity to her
two ex-husbands. Red-Haired Xuan avoided a prison sentence.
And the police station of the Eighteenth Precinct did not have to
waste its time with a complicated investigation.
A Plot
Red-Haired Xuan Spies on the Police
A Doctor's Promise
Red-Haired Xuan stepped off the tennis court. There was only one
more week before the emperor embarked on his imperial journey to
the North, and, since Mrs. Civilization hoped to win the Women's
Cup, Xuan had to practice with her constantly. It was almost seven
o'clock and dark outside when they ended their session. Xuan
turned down a dinner invitation from his manager (that's right-his
manager!), Mr. Civilization. He had something important on his
mind...
What a pain! That afternoon Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer had
whined, in that poetic way of hers, that he should help salvage her
reputation as a faithful widow. For some unknown reason their se-cret love affair-if we can call it that-had been completely exposed.
It had become a source of rumors and near-constant gossip.
"My darling," Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer had said to Xuan in a
heart-rending voice, "do you know what you have done to my
honor?"
Ever considerate of other people, Xuan acknowledged that he had
despoiled a virtuous woman. He was full of regret but could not
undo what he had done, nor could he control the rampant spread of
lurid stories. It was as if the walls had ears and the forest veins!
As he strolled the streets like a philosopher-hands in his pockets,
racket tucked under his arm-Xuan spied the shriveled, weather-beaten old fortune-teller. He was walking with an umbrella on one
shoulder and an old pair of shoes in his hand. He greeted Xuan but
dared not ask too many questions. Recalling that he owed his fame
and position partly to the fortune-teller, Red-Haired Xuan thought it
would be a decent gesture to express his gratitude by treating the old
man to a big meal. Although he had earned a few piasters by reading
the fortune of Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer, the fortune-teller re-mained as poor as before.
"So, you are not making much money lately?"
"No, sir, not at all!"
"I would like to invite you to eat and drink with me. We have
many things to talk about."
The fortune-teller agreed. Xuan called rickshaws, and a half-hour
later the two sat at the colU'\ter in the Tri~u Chau Hotel on Hang
Bu6m Street. The restaurant was very crowded. It seemed that all of
Hanoi was feverishly preparing to welcome the king. The Protector-ate Government planned to organize five days of festivals during
which many new and unusual games would be played. Rumor had
it that not only was our emperor planning to visit the North but that
the king of a neighboring country might be there as well. And not
merely the king of Cambodia or Laos but the king of Siam. The
reason for his visit was that Germany and Japan had recently per-suaded the Siamese government to attempt to reclaim traditional
lands from Indochina by publishing a map in which the territory of
Siam extended beyond the Hoanh mountain range. To maintain
peace in the Far East the Indochinese government implemented a
skillful diplomatic policy. Newspapers from all three regions de-nounced the Siamese as barbarians while simultaneously singing the
praises of the Vietnamese-describing them as the children of drag-ons and the grandchildren of fairies whose culture and literature
stretched back thousands of years. As a result, the papers contin-ued, the Vietnamese were not afraid of the Siamese and would
willingly fight them if necessary. To try to improve relations between
the countries, on the one hand, and to let the arrogant Siamese
know that we are the children of dragons and the grandchildren of
fairies, on the other, the Protectorate Government invited the king of
Siam to travel to Vietnam. Hence, all of Hanoi was busily making
arrangements to welcome the two monarchs. The Tri'eu Chau Restau-rant was bursting with people who were to benefit from the festivi-ties or were required t~ play a role in them-contractors, spies,
businessmen, dancing girls, artists, and athletes.
After ordering a range of dishes and several rounds of alcohol,
Red-Haired Xuan prepared to ask the fortune-teller (the modern-day
reincarnation of Quy C6c Tu and Gia Cat) about his future-his chil-dren, marriage, fame, and honor-and about his affair with Mrs. Dep-uty Customs Officer. Suddenly, he overheard his name mentioned in
a conversation taking place on the other side of a wooden panel. He
winked to the fortune-teller and gestured for him to listen in.
Two people were speaking.
"You said his name is Red-Haired Xuan? What does he look like?"
"I will take you to the tennis court tomorrow afternoon and show
him to you. You must know his face so that we can act on the day the
king arrives... "
They were silent for a moment. Xuan frowned and looked at the
fortune-teller, who had started drinking well before the food arrived.
The voices continued. "We should teach him a lesson right away!"
"No! I want him in jail! He has made my life miserable. I am an
educated man! I will not be satisfied with less than five years in jail
and ten years in exile. I have a plan already. Just promise you will
help me."
"I promise. But what's the plan? It must be a good one!"
"It's very good! Not only will my rival end up in jail, but he will
miss the tennis tournament! Once we take action, we must go all the
way. Otherwise, there's no point. I will print up leaflets saying,
'Down with the King of Siam!' When the king makes his entrance, I
will sneak up behind Xuan, and you will stand next to him!"
"What then?"
"You will slip several of the leaflets into the pockets of his shirt
and pants."
"What about you?"
"Me? My role is even more heroic than yours. I will scream:'Long
live the Popular Front Government! Long live Democratic France!'
Naturally, policemen and undercover security agents will arrest us
immediately... "
"Ohno!"
"But then only those found to have leaflets in their pockets will be
taken into custody. The two of us will bear witness to the fact that it
was Xuan who yelled the slogan. We will be released immediately."
"I see! But why will they arrest someone for yelling:'Long live the
current government! Long live Democratic France!'?"
"That's easy! Although France, which rules over us, is a democ-racy, we are a monarchy with a king. Siam is also a monarchy! To
welcome the kings with slogans supporting democracy implies a
desire to overthrow the monarchy! The Protectorate Government is
very sensitive about this sort of thing. If we scream, 'Long live
Democratic France!' I guarantee that somebody will be arrested."
"What a clever plan! But please lower your voice."
"Yes, but you must scream loudly when the time comes."
"Of course! I will put my whole heart into it! Please, another
bottle of liquor!"
Red-Haired Xuan stood up and peered through a small hole in the
wooden panel. There he saw the ex-fiance of Miss Snow eating and
drinking with a man wearing shorts, Chinese shoes, a cap, and his
hair up in a bun. The man resembled a certain kind of old-fashioned
gangster. After committing the man's face to memory, Xuan calmly
returned to his table and resumed drinking with the fortune-teller.
The waiter brought several dishes of delicious food, which the
fortune-teller hungrily devoured.
"The stars this month suggest that some kind of ambush is in
store for you."
"Meaning?"
"There is someone who hates you and wishes you harm. You
must be very careful! But there are also indications that you will
be protected by a special star sent from heaven!"
The fortune-teller punctuated his prophesy by gracefully drop-ping an entire roasted sparrow into his mouth. Before Xuan could
pick up the conversation, he noticed two men at a nearby table who
resembled secret police agents. Their pants were cuffed in a way
distinctive of police officers, suggesting that they actually hoped to
be recognized, despite their undercover status. Red-Haired Xuan
moved his seat closer so as to eavesdrop on their conversation. He
was spying on the spies.
"We have received our orders! The destiny of society lies in our
hands. Our mission is top secret. You must not tell a soul!"
"I await your briefing, Sir."
"State policy is now rmambiguous on this matter. Until the arrival
of the king, your job is to spy on those who falsely advocate policies
of Franco-Vietnamese harmony, Franco-Vietnamese friendship, and
direct rule. You must be vigilant against anyone who says, 'Long live
the Popular Front Goverrunent!' or'Down with Fascism!' You must
also be on the lookout for people who imitate the French in France
by greeting each other with raised hands, as if they planned to hit
one another!"
"Sir... Sir... Why are we suspicious of Franco-Vietnamese
harmony, Franco-Vietnamese friendship, and direct rule?"
"Why not? They are dangerous threats to order and security!
Normally, it is okay, but when the king comes we must take special
precautions against those who advocate direct rule. They want to
abolish the God-given powers of the king."
"What about the Communists, Sir?"
"They don't dare to do anything because everyone already knows
that they are criminals. But the democracy advocates are different.
The government has been tolerant of them up to now, ignoring them
and sometimes permitting them to act freely. We are worried that they
may try something. Democracy is the enemy of monarchism. It would
be even more dangerous if someone was allowed to yell, 'Down with
Fascism!' since it would certainly offend the king of Siam."
"What about the Nationalists?"
"No problem because nationalism does not conflict with monar-chism."
"In other words, arrest everyone except the Communists and
Nationalists!"
"Yes, arrest them all! Pay special attention to anyone who says,
'Long live Democratic France!' and'Long live the Popular Front
Govemment!'-both slogans will upset the Siamese king."
"What about those who yell, 'Long live the Monarchy!' or'Long
live Siam!' Do we arrest them or not?"
"Good question! I'll ask the chief... or... on second thought,
let's arrest them, too. 'Long live the Monarchy!' will offend advo-
cates of Democratic France, and'Long live Fascist Siam!' will be seen
as dangerous by the Popular Front Government in France."
"Sir, perhaps our policy should be as follows: anyone who greets
the two kings by standing as still and quiet as wooden statues, we
leave alone. On the other hand, anyone who says anything-even'Long live France!' or'Long live the King!'-we arrest on the spot!"
"Hmm. An interesting idea!"
"After all, they are all probably guilty of something."
"That makes a lot of sense. It will certainly contribute to the
maintenance of security. But enough already. We must be careful
and lower our voices when discussing top secret governmental mat-ters such as these."
After the two agents resolved to conceal the secrets that they had
already revealed, Red-Haired Xuan could hear nothing more, only
the sounds of chopsticks tapping on bowls. But Xuan had heard
enough. Turning back to his table, he found the fortune-teller so
engrossed in eating and drinking that he had ignored the entire
conversation. Xuan looked at the rapidly vanishing food, folded his
arms, and stared at the old man.
When the fortune-teller had cleared the table, Xuan stood up. He
was not angry at the fortune-teller's lack of manners because he had
come up with a clever scheme to stymie his rival's nefarious plan.
Adopting the scornful expression of the upper classes, he signaled
for the fortune-teller to follow him.
At the counter where he was paying his bill, Xuan met Dr.
Straight Talk together with two young men in elegant European
suits. The doctor shook his hand merrily. "This is Professor Xuan, a
tennis player. This is Mr. Hai, a very talented tennis player and
winner of the Tonkin championship in 1936. This here is Mr. Th\!,
tennis champion of both Tonkin and Annam in 1935!"
Xuan shook their hands and bowed low. "I am honored."
"This is truly a great opportunity for opponents-for rival
heroes-to get to know each other," Dr. Straight Talk said cheerfully.
"The three of you will certainly meet on the tennis court when the
king arrives."
Given his displeasure at the doctor's restrained introduction,
Xuan was thrilled to spot officers Min dO' and Min toa across the
room. That they were without their usual belts, whips, and batons
indicated that they were off-duty. Just as he was about to greet them,
the two officers spotted Xuan and raised their hands toward him in a
military salute.
"Bong zua me sit, Xuan,"2 they said in unison, "the talented tennis
player, the great hope of Indochina!"
Xuan smiled, shook their hands, and turned to introduce them.
"Sirs, this is Mr. Min dO', a policeman of the fourth rank and winner
of the Victory Medal. He won first prize in the Tour de Hanoi-Ha
Dong and second prize in Tour de Hanoi-D'O SO'n. He represents the
future of the police!... And this is Mr. Min toa, winner of the first
prize in the Tour de Hanoi-Hanoi Cup, first prize in the Hanoi-Nam
D!nh Cup, the Laundry Boy Cup, and the Melia Jaune Cup. He is
the glory of the police precinct!"
Everyone shook hands. Following the introductions, the two offi-cers again saluted Xuan and returned to their table.
Seeing that Xuan was so famous that even the policemen knew
him, the Tonkin champions of 1935 and 1936 were extremely wor-ried. A look of fear crossed their faces.
Xuan, on the other hand, was completely content. With his
counterplot in mind, he made an appointment to meet with the
other two players to discuss a private matter. They were honored, of
course, and accepted immediately. Then Red-Haired Xuan excused
himself to speak with Dr. Straight Talk in private.
"Doctor," he whispered, "you are a man of great knowledge and
talent. I implore you to use your skills to treat a person I know who
is in such pain that she... may lose her virtue."
"My science can only cure physical pain," the doctor replied. "I
cannot do much with spiritual pain!"
"Sir, I beg you to restore the lost chastity of a widow! Other-wise... people will mock her mercilessly."
The doctor inquired further about Xuan's strange request, and he
related the whole story of his secret love affair with Mrs. Deputy
Customs Officer. The doctor was flattered that Xuan considered him
such a close friend, and he promised modestly to do what he could.
"Okay, my friend. I will employ science to cure physical pain with
spiritual medicine."
Xuan said good-bye and paid the check. The fortune-teller was
nowhere to be seen.
Imperial Journeys to the North and to the East
The Crime of Cheering "Long Live the King!"
An Antidote for Loose Morals
At two o'clock that afternoon the citizens of Hanoi and people of
Tonkin gathered on the sidewalks along the streets between the train
station and the residence of the governor-general, the route fol-lowed by all important processions. Imperial soldiers lined the roads
in a solemn and orderly fashion. The rumors, it turns out, were
correct. The king of Siam was undertaking an imperial journey to
our country of Nam. People saw pictures of the Siamese king in the
newspapers and marveled at his youth. The front pages of all the
daily papers published huge seven-column headlines announcing
the event:
"The Rejuvenation of Vietnam," "A Historic Turning
Point: Vietnamese-Siamese Friendship," "Two Kings in One Coun-try," and "Imperial Journeys to the North and East" ("to the North"
referred to the direction traveled by our king from Annam to Tonkin;
"to the East" referred to the direction traveled by the king of Siam).
Virtually every article referred to the visit of the Siamese king as a
"turning point." Royalist papers were especially effusive:
"A Special
Honor for the Common People of Vietnam: The Siam King Comes to
Play with Us!" "Siam and Vietnam: Hand in Hand on the Road to
Progress!" Only one paper protested by printing the following on
the front page:
"Accentuate the Positive, Conceal the Negative!
Please Don't Let Us Lose Face!"
Thus the public turned out in their finest clothes to welcome the
kings. Many men even wore makeup. The Europeanization Tailor
Shop took the opportunity to design a special outfit for women
named "Welcome to the King"... When the big day came, both
Miss Snow and Mrs. Civilization wore the outfit as part of an effort
to launch the new design among the upper classes of Hanoi.
Red-Haired Xuan stood with the two other athletes at the comer
of Hang C Street. Using the intelligence he had gathered at the
restaurant the previous day, Xuan was plotting to undermine his
rival's plot against him and to secure additional benefits for himself.
As part of his counterplan, he had persuaded the tennis champions
from 1935 and 1936 (both of whom he was afraid of) to dress in a
fashion identical to his. Hence, all three wore white pants, white
shoes, sleeveless white shirts, and white caps on their heads.
"Since there are only three of us," Xuan had explained to them,
"we must dress differently from the common hordes. We must show
that athletes are more than just vain pretty boys."
The two gullible champions fell right into Xuan's clever trap! Little
did they know that he was scheming not only to turn the tables on
his enemy but to use his enemy's plot against him to do in the other
two as well! The sports festival was scheduled to begin the day after
the kings arrived. As he was clearly a weaker player than the two ex-champions, Xuan knew it would be futile to rely on talent alone.
The royal cars were slow to arrive, and the crowd began to grow
uneasy. Hai and Thl,l stood stoically at attention, posing so as to
make the muscles in their arms bulge out. Like virtuous noblemen,
they stared straight ahead, taking no notice of the beautiful girls
watching them from across the street. Pretending that he was bor-rowing their handkerchiefs, Red-Haired Xuan inserted himself be-tween Hai and Th., and slipped his hands into their back pockets.
"So, what should we cheer?" he asked innocently, "Long live the
king?"
The two champions smiled condescendingly but did not reply.
Red-Haired Xuan kept an eye on his back. Finally, he caught a
glimpse of his rival's henchman approaching from behind (he was
tipped off by the cap, the hair in a bun, and the Chinese shoes).
Xuan folded his arms and feigned ignorance as the henchman fur-tively slipped something into his back pocket and quickly stole
away Moving slowly so as not to draw attention to himself, Xuan
pulled the sheets of paper from his back pocket, divided them into
two stacks, and, without so much as glancing at them, stuffed them
into his two friends' back pockets. Naturally, they thought he was
returning their handkerchiefs. Transfixed by the talking flowers on
the other side of the road, Hai and Th,. neither noticed nor sus-pected anything.
Red-Haired Xuan surveyed the crowd looking for Miss Snow's ex-fiance. Although they were only five people apart, it was difficult for
Xuan to spot him because he was wearing a European suit and a pair
of sunglasses! He obviously planned to do something bad.
The crowd began to buzz with excitement. The king's car had
been spotted, and the hooves of cavalry horses echoed in the dis-tance. Xuan glanced around and saw his lovelorn rival and the old-fashioned gangster positioning themselves a few steps away from
him.
"So, which will it be?" Xuan asked his two friends again, "'Long
live the king!' or'"Immortality for the king!'?"
Hai and Th,. scoffed at Xuan's old-fashioned enthusiasm.
"Toa just imitate moa!" one of them said.
The kings' cars were now only a few steps away. People in the
crowd swayed back and forth, pointing and talking excitedly. Quick
as a water hen, Xuan darted through the crowd in the opposite
direction of the procession. After moving about twenty meters, he
stopped and looked back.
"Vive la France!" tennis champion Hai yelled out suddenly.
The slogan was immediately followed by several others. "Vive la
Front Populaire! Vive la Republique Francaise!"
To the crowd on the pavement expressions of shock were clearly
visible on the faces of the governor-general, the resident superior, the
king of our country, and the king of Siam. After the procession
passed, imperial soldiers refused to let the onlookers dissolve into
the street. A phalanx of security agents and secret policemen de-scended on the section of the crowd from where the slogans had rung
out. Following normal procedures, people's pockets were checked
for bombs and guns. In the pockets of the two champions, leaflets
denouncing Siamese imperialism were discovered and confiscated.
The two men were ushered into a squad car and driven to police
headquarters.
Since every newspaper in Indochina had come out early in the
morning on that day, reliable news about the episode was scarce.
Rumors spread among the citizens of Hanoi that the government
had arrested two dangerous extremists belonging to the "Sleeveless
White Shirt Party." Even the General Athletic Department was un-aware that the suspects were actually the two ex-champions who
were scheduled to play for the kings the following morning.
The crowd dispersed, and Red-Haired Xuan returned home.
Upon meeting Miss Snow and, he confi-dently assured them that the Indochinese Tennis Championship
would soon be his.
Just like a real manager, Mr. Civilization urged him to be cautious.
"The king of Siam is also a big sports fan. It seems that he has
brought along his own tennis champion, who is supposed to display
his talents to our French and Vietnamese spectators following the
national tournament! You may be confident of victory in the tourna-ment, but you should prepare yourself for the Siamese challenge
afterwards. If you can defeat the Siamese champion, it will be a
glorious victory for Tonkin, Vietnam, and Indochina!"
"Sometimes we must leave things in the hands of fate," Xuan
replied cryptically.
As they walked, Dr. Straight Talk came running toward them.
"Mrs. Senior Clerk has invited all her friends and relatives over to
her house for dinner," he exclaimed. "We are to celebrate the happy
fact that little Master Blessing has stopped sneezing. She has asked
me to invite you all."
"You may all go if you wish," Miss Snow replied, "but I will not!"
"But why?" Dr. Straight Talk asked. "Is something wrong?"
"Please do not ask!" Xuan whispered, grabbing the doctor's hand.
"Snow is my fiance."
"Oh, you are so very lucky, my friend!" Dr. Straight Talk an-swered, with surprise. "Congratulations!"
Everyone shook hands, said good-bye, and promised to meet
again soon.
It was strange that Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer had not come
out to welcome the kings or to watch the crowds. Xuan, too, was
surprised. When he arrived home, he inquired about her absence
with Master Blessing, who sagely responded:
"No way! No way!"
Satisfied that his student's mental capacity had improved, Xuan
went off to look for his mother. But, when he came upon Mrs.
Deputy Customs Officer, she was unresponsive; she just held her
face in her hands and cried.
"This is terrible!" Xuan admonished her. "Please be reasonable!
Who can bear such whining! If a love affair with you is this miser-able, God knows what marriage would be like!"
To explain her frazzled state of mind, Mrs. Deputy Customs Offi-cer referred Xuan to two recent issues of the Con V~t magazine.
"Look at these, my darling" she said. "Read the two short novels
serialized in these damned issues, and you will understand. I want
to sue the bastards... "
Red-Haired Xuan read the titles: The Mistress and Uncle Phac-to's
Crime. They were translated versions of La patronne and Le crime au
pere Boniface, both by Guy de Maupassant.
Xuan nonchalantly threw both copies of Con V(?t down on the
table. "Hey, why don't you read them?" Mrs. Deputy Customs Offi-cer said. "They were obviously written to mock us!"
"Stop being silly! They are translations from the French. I have no
interest in reading them!"
"But they seemed as if they were written about you and me!" Mrs.
Deputy Customs Officer countered. "It's shameful. I am not at all
amused!"
Reluctantly, Xuan sat down and began to read the stories that had
allegedly bad-mouthed him. His interpretation of the stories, how-ever, differed from Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer's.
"Anybody who is anybody is bad-mouthed in print," he reas-sured her. "Not to worry, my dear. In this life the more honorable
you are, the more you are denounced in the press. It is only those
about whom no one gives a damn that are ignored."
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer found Xuan's logic persuasive, and
she started to calm down. "Of course, you are right!" she said,
showering Xuan with kisses. "You are too good to me!"
But Xuan had grown tired of these middle-aged expressions of
affection. He pushed her heavily made-up face away.
"How terrible!" he exclaimed.
The faithful widow was furious at this rejection. "You no-good
bastard! You unfaithful wretch! You have ruined my life, and now
you want to get rid of me! It's not going to be so easy with this
woman, I'll tell you that! You better watch yourself!"
"Enough, Madame!" replied Xuan, standing up and waving his
hand at her dismissively. "You have been very kind! You have a good
heart! Maybe I have ruined your life. It is certainly possible! But I
think I have found a way to fix it. I have invited a real doctor to see
you, not just some quack."
"Oh no!"
"It is true, Madame! A doctor will come tonight who will restore
your damaged chastity."
"I don't know what you are talking about!" Mrs. Deputy Customs
Officer screamed. "Forget it! I don't need a doctor!"
"Don't be childish!" Xuan admonished her. "You and I, together
like that. It's nothing to joke about. If you accuse me of tarnishing
your virtue, at least you must give me a chance to put things right."
"Forget it! I'll have nothing to do with it!"
Red-Haired Xuan solemnly raised his right hand.
"If I am joking, let Heaven exterminate my entire extended fam-ily! I guarantee that Dr. Straight Talk is going to help you. He's due
here any minute!"
"Oh my God!" Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer screamed. "Not Dr.
Straight Talk! I'm going to die! I must die!"
The sound of car horns outside the gate put an abrupt end to her
tantrum. She looked at the clock. It was seven already, and the guests
were arriving to celebrate the recovery of little Master Blessing.
With the single exception of Miss Snow, the party was attended
by the entire upper crust of Hanoi society as well as several members
of the common people who either knew Mrs. Deputy Customs Offi-cer or had business at the Europeanization Tailor Shop. Little Master
Blessing sat in the chair of honor.
After an hour of small talk and eating, Dr. Straight Talk suddenly
stood up and addressed the guests. "Ladies and gentlemen... We
are all friends here. I am putting together a short speech about an
issue of great social and moral importance that is often misunder-stood. Before delivering the speech in public, I thought I might try it
out here first in this much more intimate setting."
There was a smattering of applause.
"Great! Long live Dr. Straight Talk!... "
"Lip lip la!" Red-Haired Xuan cheered.
"What is your speech about, Doctor?" someone in the room
asked.
"I wish to talk about middle-aged women! Why do women over
forty often feel an intense desire for love? Should society make fun
of these women? Should they be mocked or not? This issue should
be familiar to everyone."
A round of applause followed the doctor's introduction. (Friends
of Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer were certain he was planning to
play a trick on her.) A wave of anxiety swept over Mrs. Deputy
Customs Officer, and her face turned pale.
Dr. Straight Talk stood up and began reading from a stack of
papers. "Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. Tonight, I will try to
share with you the little that I know about the'autumn of love'-or,
in other words, the growth of lust and desire among those who are
getting on in years and allegedly ought to know better. Our society
has adopted a narrow and prejudiced view of this phenomenon,
perhaps because science has yet to fully explain it. For example, if
we see a fifty-year-old man hiring a young housekeeper or taking a
concubine, we disapprovingly label him a'cradle robber' (applause).
It is even more disgraceful for a fifty-year-old woman to become
entangled in a love affair. In such a case people do not hesitate to
curse and mock her with cruel words. But we must ask ourselves,
Are such attacks proper? Do not old or aging people have the right
to enjoy sexual satisfaction? No! No, I say! This is a matter for the
Creator to decide, not mere human beings! (Applause.)
"In the course of life, there are two typical periods of sexual crisis:
adolescence and the time directly prior to the transition to old age.
Since the Creator has arranged it this way, there are few people who
can avoid these periods. The greater the degree of spiritual crisis that
teenagers experience during adolescence, the more confusing will be
the autumn of love for'old people who should be content and enjoy
life.' When old men take young concubines (applause), they are
mocked and ridiculed. Sometimes older women also get involved in
love affairs and flirtatious encounters (applause). Today I do not plan
to pass judgment on these bad things but to explain why they occur.
"In regard to the sexual crises experienced by middle-aged
women"-Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer sneezed-"Dr. Vachet has
some interesting comments. I will quote from his work so as to show
that science can illuminate issues hitherto understood through such
shallow and meaningless words and phrases as corrupted customs,
itchiness, flirtatiousness, cradle robbing... According to Dr. Vachet,
during periods of sexual crisis, women often exhibit strange and
unexpected symptoms. The interruption of menstruation coinciding
with the shortening of the temper signifies the onset of physical and
spiritual changes that in tum may trigger a complex and intractable
desire for sex. Unfortunately for these now easily excitable women,
these changes tend to occur after their husbands are old and sexually
impotent. What are they to do? Since they are old and wrinkled, it is
difficult for them to find young paramours who love them deeply
(applause). Moreover, few women dare to reject convention and pub-lic opinion and discard the virtue that they have been cultivating
their entire lives... But sex continues to obsess them-to make
their faces red and their hearts race.
"Alas! These women try to control themselves even as they are
undergoing significant uncontrollable changes: they are often angry,
hot-tempered, crabby, bored with life, or newly jealous about an-cient episodes involving their husbands. Sometimes they suddenly
join mysterious religions or take up superstition and witchcraft...
"If the husband is still strong, it may be a great boon for him to
have such a wife. But, alas, many times the man does not have the
requisite strength. Sometimes he has his hands full just keeping the
family warm and well fed (applause). There are also many cases in
which the husband has passed away and the woman must cope with
this period of crisis as a ividovv (applause). If she does not remarry, it
is only natural that she will take lovers (applause). There are many
humorous examples I could cite, but what is important to remember
is that they all stem from a single physical condition. The crisis is
virtually unavoidable, but, fortunately, it lasts for only a limited
period of time. Ultimately, the cause lies in the sex organs them-selves: the fact that the eggs lack blood and the uterus ceases to
menstruate. This gives rise to a kind of physical chaos that Vietnam-ese women often refer to as'the end of the guilt.' Later on, as other
organs begin to supply the eggs with the necessary fluids, the crisis
will dissipate, and the woman will once again become her healthy
self!"
The crowd roared with approval.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer recovered consciousness the min-ute the doctor stopped speaking. Not only did the treatment that
Xuan had threatened to apply prove harmless to her status as a
virtuous widow, but it put an end to the seemingly endless gossip
about her ("the walls with ears and the forest with veins"). Her
flirtatiousness now had a legitimate place in the sacred book of
saints and sages. She was glad, in fact, to know that she had mis-behaved in such a scientific way.
Red-Haired Xuan Saves the Country
Red-Haired Xuan: A Great Man
Pity the Father-of-the-Bride Who is not
Smacked in the Face
A1though even the cheapest tickets cost three piasters, over three
thousand spectators showed up that morning to attend the tourna-ment. Hanoi's Rollande Varreau Tennis Stadium was about to mark
a historic turning point in the history of sports. Rumor had it that
many late-arriving tennis fans could not buy tickets and were so
outraged that they chose to die in a sporting way-they committed
slow suicide by smoking pure opium into their lungs over an ex-tended period.
The hopes of Grandpa H6ng, Mr. Civilization, Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer, Mr. ILL, and many others were dashed early when
Mrs. Civilization suffered a devastating defeat in the women's tour-nament. Miss Snow tried to assuage her father's disappointment by
reminding him that a victory by Xuan could still salvage the family
honor. At that moment two Frenchwomen were playing for the
French Women's Championship; the supporters from the European-ization Shop barely paid attention.
Seated among high-ranking civil and military officials from all
three governments, spectators could see (from left to right): the
governor-general, the resident superior, the king of our country, and
S. M. Prajadhipok, the king of Siam. Although he wore a European
suit, the king of Siam also wore a traditional crown made of gold and
pearls. It looked like a tower because each of its nine levels became
progressively smaller toward the top. It was supposedly a symbol of
the land of a million elephants. Behind the king was one of his
German advisors and one of his Japanese advisors, symbols of
Siam's rapid progress toward independence. Siam's tennis cham-pion, Luang Prabahol, sat next to him, confirming that the king of
the land of a thousand elephants was also a sports fan. The directors
of the General Athletic Department of Tonkin were anxious and
angry because the final match was only moments away, and still
there was no sign of the ex-champions Hai and Th,!
What to do?
The General Athletic Department sent many people to search for
the missing champions but to no avail. Even their families did not
know where they were. The world of sports was in an uproar;
people were shocked, surprised, worried, and frightened. Nobody
knew that both men were lying on the bug-infested interrogation
room floor of the Security Police Station. Even the Department of
Counterespionage was oblivious to their identity, since all of its
agents were tailing the two kings, and there were not enough extra
staff members to check the prisoners' identity cards. The General
Athletic Department concluded that they had been duped and be-trayed. Such behavior was not uncommon among famous athletes.
To salvage the afternoon and appease the spectators, the directors of
the General Athletic Department invited the champion of Siam to
play against Red-Haired Xuan.
The match was announced over the loudspeaker, and the audi-ence applauded enthusiastically. After all, Hai, Th,, and Xuan were
known quantities, but no one had ever witnessed the talents of
Luang Prabahol, the champion of Siam! The French and Vietnamese
spectators were also pleased because they imagined that the General
Athletic Department had planned all along for the champion of Siam
to play against Xuan, an underdog who had never won a champion-ship. It was a true slight. Of course, Xuan's manager, Mr. Civiliza-tion, was thrilled that his client was to represent Hanoi and defend
the honor of the Fatherland against the champion of Siam.
The audience cheered and applauded for Xuan. The king of Siam,
on the other hand, made a face more furious than had ever been
seen before on the face of a Son of Heaven who rules over a land of
one million elephants. The obvious weakness of his player from
Bangkok struck him li.ke a bolt of thunder. Xuan of Hanoi won the
first set 6-1. The king of our country, the governor-general, and the
resident superior began to show signs of concern. A crushing victory
for Indochina in the sports arena might trigger a diplomatic crisis.
Alas! Everything in this world has its pluses and minuses. During
the second set the crowd watched uneasily as Xuan began to let up
on his opponent. Mr. Civilization grew especially worried when
Xuan lost the second set 5-7. The more sophisticated sports fans,
however, assumed that he was saving his energy for the final set.
During the first game of the third set both players competed in-tensely. Luang Prabahol played as well as he could but was unable to
gain the upper hand. When the referee shouted 15-30, the king of
Siam resigned himself to the imminent defeat of his champion. He
immediately pulled from his pocket a map of Indochina redrawn by
official Siamese cartographers so that Siam's territory extended past
the Hoanh mountain range. Ignoring the game, he stared intently at
the map. "La guerre! La guerre!" whispered the German and Japa-nese advisors.
Unaware of what was going on, the French and Vietnamese spec-tators continued to cheer wildly for Xuan.
"Ca rang!... Ca rang ta!... A vang ta se vit!... A vang ta
dO'o!" the referee shouted.
The air was thick with foreboding. Our king, the governor-general, and the resident superior exchanged worried glances. Fi-nally, the governor-general ordered the director of the Indochinese
Political Bureau to go find Red-Haired Xuan's manager. Naturally,
Mr. Civilization was moved that such a high-ranking government
official desired to speak with him in private. They huddled together
in an empty corner of the stadium.
"The Protectorate Government and the Imperial Government have
an important favor to ask of you," the director whispered. "The fate
of our county is at stake. You must ask your client to lose the match
against the champion of Siam! In return for forfeiting the honors of
victory, you will be compensated generously by our government!"
Mr. Civilization was stunned.
"Just do as I say!" the director continued. "It is very important, and
time is of the essence! If Annam defeats Siam in tennis, war will cer-tainly break out! We must follow the Peace Policy of the French Gov-ernment. Otherwise, the mountains will be covered with bones, and
the rivers will run red with blood. I'll fill you in on the details later."
The crowd cheered noisily. "Ca rang, ca rang ta. A vang ta se vit,"
the referee repeated. Xuan walked over to the ball boy.
"You must throw the match now!" Civilization whispered ur-gently to him. "Concede! Victory means death and war!"
The audience looked on anxiously as the score changed from 7-7 to
7-8. There was still hope for Hanoi, but then the unexpected oc-curred. Xuan lobbed a return so absurdly high in the air that it sailed
out of bounds and knocked into the fence surrounding the court...-9. The crowd booed in disappointment. The military band struck
up La Marseillaise to congratulate the Siamese champion. The kings
and high officials returned to the governor-general's mansion.
The official procession of flag-bearing cars left the stadium, but a
large section of the crowd remained behind to see Xuan. One small
group of angry fans denounced him bitterly. Another felt sorry for
him. Still another shouted:
"Down with Red-Haired Xuan!" Grandpa
H6ng, Miss Snow, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer, and Mrs. Civiliza-tion were extremely disappointed. Photographers swarmed around
Xuan snapping his picture. Journalists began questioning Xuan's sus-picious play, especially on the final serve. Did Xuan miss-hit the last
ball deliberately? How could a talented player like Xuan, a tennis
professor no less... have brought such shame upon his country?
Denunciations rang out:
"He's a national disgrace! Go back to the
cow shed! Go back to the cow shed!"
"A bas Xuan! A bas Xuan! Des explications!" shouted several
Frenchmen.
The situation began to deteriorate, and Mr. Civilization and Red-Haired Xuan sought a safe haven on the roof of Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer's car. Following Civilization's advice, Xuan prepared to
address the angry crowd, now several thousand strong and growing
more aggressive by the minute.
Civilization was struck by the gravity of the situation and rose to
speak first. "Xuan did not lose because he lacks talent or ability! You
can all see as much for yourselves. Please, listen for just a moment,
and you will know why my client had to lose." The weightiness of
his own words pleased Civilization immensely.
Following suit, Xuan addressed the crowd in a haughty and imperi-ous voice. "People! You do not understand the important reason that I
conceded the match to the Siamese champion! Frivolous people! You
do not know the profound sacrifice that I have made (he tapped on his
chest). You do not yet understand that I have renounced personal
fame and fortune to secure peace and order for our Motherland! Dur-ing these dangerous times it is better to sacrifice one's personal
glory-even if it means losing a tennis game-than to risk antagoniz-ing a neighboring country." He pumped his fist into the air!
"For many years the French government and the French people
have struggled for world peace. Who knows what will be the out-come of a fight between Vietnam and Siam, but such a conflict will
certainly drag the entire world into war! Therefore, I did not com-pete today so as to win points on a tennis court. Rather, I played to
serve the higher diplomatic interests of our government!"
He raised his arm over his head. "I do not want thousands of
people to fall victim to war-to fall into the trap of arms merchants!"
He lowered his arms. "Oh, my people! Although you are angry with
me, I still love and esteem you! Go back to work! Go back to your
comfortable lives! Enjoy your peace and security! I do not claim to be
some sort of national savior-I have only done what I could to save
you from the horrors of war! Long live peace! Long live the League of
Nations!"
Using the talents he had developed advertising venereal disease
medicine and exhibiting the selfless qualities he had learned running
errands for a theater (and with the assistance of Mr. Civilization),
Red-Haired Xuan had won over the public just like a skillful French
politician. Despite the condescending tone of his remarks, the crowd
expressed no resentment toward Xuan. Rather, they admired his
pluck for daring to deliver such a speech! After he finished, applause
echoed like rain in a thunderstorm. Once again, an army of photogra-phers rushed toward him.
"Long live Red-Haired Xuan!" the crowd roared with approval.
"Long live his heroic defeat!"
With a modest gesture typical of great men, Xuan pumped his
fists in the air, leapt to the ground, and got inside the car. Off it went
among a procession of other vehicles, leaving behind several thou-sand onlookers in a state of emotional frenzy.
When Grandpa H6ng's car pulled into the driveway, he was so
dismayed to see Grandma casually chopping areca nuts that he for-got to clear his throat and spit. Didn't the stupid woman know that a
historic event had just occurred? "Haven't you heard about my youn-gest son-in-law?" he asked her. "My only worry is that he has yet to
cause sufficient damage to Snow's virtue."
"Did your daughter-in-law win or lose?" Grandma asked inno-cently. "How about your youngest son-in-law? Did he win?"
"He lost!" Grandpa H6ng replied, pursing his lips. "But there are
different ways to lose! He lost victoriously! He lost in the most glori-ous way! Madame, do not scold me anymore! Your youngest son-in-
law is now a great man-a hero. He has single-handedly saved the
country!"
Grandma fell silent as various family members began returning to
the house. Miss Snow was already putting on airs! Mrs. Deputy
Customs Officer flitted around the house like a water bug. Mr. ILL
kneeled down slavishly to change Red-Haired Xuan's shoes. Little
Master Blessing did not say, "No way." Dr. Straight Talk congratu-lated Grandma.
"Grandma, I respectfully offer my congratulations to the happy
couple."
"Thank you. We have been planning the wedding for a long
time," Mr. Civilization responded.
Grandpa H6ng crawled into bed and demanded the services of the
opium servant. Although he seemed to be recalling the excitement of
the match, he was, in fact, contemplating the age-old expression
"Smack the father of the bride in the face." The meaning and origins
of the saying were obscure even to the older generation. Grandpa had
long affected a swelled head so as not to be considered out of fashion.
Maybe it would swell even more if it were smacked. But who was
going to smack him? He punctuated the question in his mind with
three imaginary question marks. He told himself that only time would
tell, closed his eyes, and tried to forget his frustration.
The sound of a car parking and footsteps approaching the house
roused him from his sleep. Everybody looked out the window and
saw a uniformed Frenchman enter the house. He had stripes on his
sleeves and wore a sword hanging from a gold belt. A wave of fear
passed through the house.
The Frenchman greeted the guests politely in a kind of Franco-Vietnamese. "Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to speak with the
talented tennis player, Xuan, and his manager... "
Mr. Civilization bowed down to greet him and signaled for Xuan
to stand up.
"Gentlemen," the Frenchman said in a loud dignified voice, "I am
an emissary from the governor-general. I have come to inform the
two of you that, because of your selfless willingness to forfeit the
match to the Siamese champion, the government would like to
award both of you with the Legion of Honor of the fifth rank!"
"Hey!" Grandpa H6ng called to his servants. "Prepare the altar!"
The emissary raised his hand. "Excuse me! But the decision has
yet to be formalized in writing. It is perhaps too early for the altar.
Please wait a couple of days. Moreover, I also must inform you that
it is not only our government that plans to honor you. The imperial
courts in Hue' and Bangkok each plan to bestow honors upon you
that may be distributed among your relatives. They include the
Dragon Award and the Medal of Siamese Virtue. In addition, the
director of the Indochinese Political Bureau wishes to invite you for
dinner tonight. He is looking forward to speaking with you."
Red-Haired Xuan bowed his head low. "We are very honored."
Mr. Civilization also bowed his head. "We are profoundly grateful
to the government!"
"Please honor the director of the Political Bureau with your pres-ence this evening. You will be awarded medals for yourselves and
your family members. You should prepare at once, and the French
government will inform the Imperial Courts in Hue' and Siam that
you plan to accept. I offer each of you my most heartfelt congratula-tions. Please excuse me, for I must return to the governor-general."
The manager and the talented tennis player escorted the high-ranking emissary to a huge car, displaying a three-colored flag. The
car pulled away, and Xuan and Civilization returned to the house.
They were speechless with joy. Grandpa H6ng stood up on his bed.
"Ladies and gentlemen, this is a day of jubilation. I wish to an-
nounce that my wife and I have agreed to marry our youngest daugh-ter Snow to Mr. Xuan!"
Everyone clapped with the exception of Mrs. Deputy Customs
Officer. Mr. Civilization shook hands with his father. "Toa is very
kind," he said to him. "Tonight at the director's dinner party moa will
request a Dragon Award for toa."
Grandpa H6ng embraced and kissed his son. "Thank you very
much! I am deeply honored! How nice of toa to treat moa like this."
Xuan caught a glimpse of the sulking face of Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer. The faithful widow had a pathetic lovelorn look about
her.
"Let us not forget my female friend here," Xuan added, "She is a
virtuous woman. She built the tennis court to support sports and
has been especially kind to me. Moreover, she has remained admi-rably faithful to her two ex-husbands. I wish to announce that I will
be asking the Siamese government to award her the Medal of Sia-mese Virtue."
"Is that okay with you, Father?" Xuan asked his new father-in-law.
Everyone clapped their hands and cheered.
"Of course!" Grandpa H6ng replied, "It is well deserved!"
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was so moved that her face turned
red. She longed intensely to throw her arms around her secret lover
and kiss him, but, since she had just been awarded the Medal of
Siamese Virtue, she struggled to restrain herself. It was up to her to
set a good example for other women.
Miss Snow was hiding behind a curtain, pretending to be bashful
about her upcoming marriage. Grandma sat at Grandpa's feet, look-ing forlorn. She regretted that she had scolded her son, criticized her
daughter, and bad-mouthed Xuan. Grandpa lay on his bed, smoking
his ninety-sixth pipe of opium and imagining the satisfaction of
being smacked in the face.
Before everyone had finished congratulating everyone else, a
wave of guests merrily entered the house. They included Officers
Min dO' and Min toa, Victor Ban, the monk Tang Phu from the Lady
Banh Pagoda, the old fortune-teller, High School Graduate Tan, the
horned senior clerk, and Mrs. ILL. A series of long-winded congratu-lations echoed through the house.
"On behalf of hotel managers I wish to offer congratulations... "
"On behalf of the police, let me convey my warmest regards.
"On behalf of the Buddha, I wish you happiness and longev-ity... "
"On behalf of women, I... "
The senior postal clerk whispered a special congratulations to
Xuan. "On behalf of homed husbands I pray that you have a virtu-ous wife."
Gradually, the chorus of congratulations became tiresome. Even
Grandpa H6ng grew bored. What did he need with more hollow
praise? He longed to be smacked in the face so that his head would
truly swell up!
But, alas, another distinguished guest arrived! He wore tradi-tional clothes, and his chest was covered with gold medals... Who
was this stranger?
"Ladies and gentlemen," he announced upon entering the house,
"I am a member of the Association of Spiritual and Ethical Develop-ment. I wish to meet with Red-Haired Xuan, a great man in our
society... "
Red-Haired Xuan frowned and stood up. "I am he. What can I do
for you, Sir?"
The man put his hands together in greeting. "Your honor!"
"No need for such ceremony!" Xuan responded abruptly. "What
do you want with me?"
"Your honor, our association offers congratulations to you for
receiving the Legion of Honor. It is a great honor for upper-class
intellectuals. I am here to invite Your Honor to join our association.
Your presence will certainly contribute to the spiritual and ethical
development of our nation. You are truly a noble person."
"I am not noble!" Xuan replied curtly. "I am a member of the
common people!"
"Your Honor," the man continued, "although our association has
previously stressed nobility, our new policy is more oriented toward
the common people. For example, we have taken to playing trf tom, a
card game enjoyed by many members of the common people."
Xuan was unimpressed. "What in the name of your god damn
mother's milk are you talking about?"
"Thank you very much, Your Honor. I also head a committee that
is editing a new Vietnamese dictionary. We have heard that Your
Honor often uses common expressions such as'God damn it' and'Damn your mother's milk.' Hence, in addition to inviting you to
join our association, we would like to ask your permission to add
some of your colorful expressions to our dictionary."
"Of course," Red-Haired Xuan replied nodding his head. "If it
will please you, I will join your association, and I grant you permis-sion to include those words in your dictionary."
"Thank you very much, Your Honor. This is a lucky day for intel-lectuals and upper-class members of Vietnamese society. Please per-mit me to take my leave!" He bowed respectfully to Xuan, nodded
somewhat less respectfully to the others, and exited the front door.
Now it was the fortune-teller's turn. He was frustrated because he
had been waiting for a long time and had yet to get a word in.
Stammering and rubbing his ears, he approached Grandpa H6ng.
"Grandpa, on behalf of fortune-tellers, I wish you many blessings
and a long life. May the bride and groom enjoy one hundred years of
happiness. I am a very good fortune-teller. The predictions that I
made about Mr. Xuan five months ago have all come to pass. He is a
talented man with a good heart. His fame has spread far and
wide... "
"How banal!" snapped Grandpa H6ng. "You only praise what
everyone has noted already!"
Pity the poor fortune-teller.
"Father, it is true," said Xuan. "His predictions are very accurate."
But Grandpa was sulking because no one had smacked his face
yet.
"Grandpa," the fortune-teller continued, "the fate of your son-in-
law is the fate of a hero, of a great man. He will have power, wealth,
a beautiful wife, and many children. Xuan is like a precious-"
Tired of the fortune-teller's nonstop ranting and disappointed
that no one had yet smacked his face, Grandpa was overcome with
an urge to smack the fortune-teller. But, instead, he closed his eyes,
coughed in his usual way, grabbed his chest, and moaned:
"I know! I
know, what a pain!... Shut up already!!!"