Red-Haired Xuan's Luck in Love The Compassion of Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer Thursday at 3:00 P.M.
Inside the tree-lined tennis stadium two Frenchmen served and volleyed at the net on the far-left court.
A pair of ball boys ambled lethargically back and forth, retrieving and returning loose balls.
The players swung their rackets lazily, their shirts soaked through with perspiration.
The patter of tennis balls and the scorekeeper's voice rang out rhythmically against the humming of tens of thousands of cicadas.
Outside on the street a lemonade vendor squatted against the handles of his cart to talk business with a fellow street merchant.
Damn!
It's still early.
Really!
C'mon!
On the sidewalk, under the shadow of a kapok tree, an elderly fortune-teller sat quietly, arranging the tools of his trade:
a small box, an ink jar, a tube of lipstick, a pencil holder, and several sample horoscope charts.
From time to time he yawned, taking on the ex-pression of a true philosopher.
Nearby, Red-Haired Xuan attempted to engage a sugarcane girl in deep discussion.
Commerce?
No!
Here we have a budding love affair.
And not just any ordinary love affair.
It is-as today's newspapers might call it-a love affair of the com-mon People (with a capital P).
she scolded him.
C'mon.
Let's have a little.
True, and saving it doesn't mean they'll worship it either.
But, we're not meant to be, and there's nothing in it for me.
Nothing's moving today.
Red-Haired Xuan rose abruptly to his feet and admonished her in a voice both sulky and heroic.
Miss Sugar Cane shot him a bitchy scowl.
Chuckling like a whinnying horse, Red-Haired Xuan sat back down.
'Tm kidding.
I'm kidding.
Of course I need you!
We need each other!
Take it easy.
Reaching into his back pocket, Red-Haired Xuan pulled out a small handkerchief, knotted like a pig's ear.
He unfolded it, took out a coin, and tossed it down dramatically onto the cement pavement.
As Miss Sugar Cane selected and peeled a stalk for him, Xuan began muttering under his breath.
Five hi'lo.
Let's see…Two left over…I spent three last night on my buddy.
Two hilo for tickets to the nightclub, one for two bowls of noodle soup with extra-rare beef.
Do I know how to enjoy life or what?!
A hell-raiser, that's what I am!
Eating and throwing money around like that…God damn it!
But don't worry.
But Miss Sugar Cane didn't reply.
Xuan chomped noisily on his stalk.
He sucked the sweet juice and spit out the leftover shards in the direction of a nearby electrical pole.
Finally, he wiped his hands on his pants, stood up, and stretched his back.
Miss Sugar Cane held out nineteen cents in change, but Xuan clasped his hands be-hind his back.
Glaring angrily, Miss Sugar Cane opened her fingers and watched as the coins tumbled to the pavement.
Xuan bent down quickly to pick them up.
Recalling the words of a southern opera, Xuan broke into song:
Xuan sashayed over to the fortune-teller.
Stopping abruptly, he eyeballed the old man like a peasant discovering Madame Be Tfs famous monkey cages for the first time.
Read my fortune!
he blurted out.
Roused from his nap, the old man peered up at Xuan and, quick as a policeman writing a ticket, drew a feathered pen from behind his ear.
Two hilo.
Two hew per reading.
One hiw.
Deal!
Here.
Crouching down on a mat, Xuan placed a coin before the fortune-teller.
The old man unfolded a small piece of tissue paper, ground a bit of powder from his ink stick, and spit purposefully into a small ink pot.
I'm twenty-five, old man.
The fortune-teller leaned forward on his haunches, mumbled pen-sively to himself, and calculated something on his fingers.
Red-Haired Xuan wrapped his arms around his knees and rested his chin on his wrists.
The fortune-teller scribbled a few notes and began chanting some astrological verse.
Bad stars becloud your personal fate.
Your parents have passed the earthly state.
They wait with fairies in the nether-world.
He stopped chanting.
Yes!
He continued to chant:
Propitious stars seem close at hand.
Your n.ame will ring throughout the land.
Fame and the good life are in store for you.
Great!
This year.
Xuan was suspicious.
he asked.
Red-Haired Xuan clapped his hands together as if applauding a well-hit tennis ball.
Yes!
Yes!
Yesterday after the show, I passed S~m Cong Lane, and a group of young ladies loitering on the corner charged toward me.
They grabbed my hands and pulled at my shirt.
I must be hot stuff!
He turned and sneered at Miss Sugar Cane.
Lowering his voice, he whispered to the old man.
Great going!
I've got her right where I want her.
Just then, a sleek automobile pulled up in front of the tennis stadium.
The back door opened, and out stepped a hefty woman in her mid-forties, made up like a fashionable young seductress.
Her face was caked with powder and lipstick, and her newly permed jet-black hair fell in tiny ringlets from beneath an elegant and equally tiny scarf.
She looked to be over seventy kilograms!
She clutched a huge leather purse and a tiny umbrella in one hand, and in the other she hugged a miniature dog, as other-worldly as a unicorn.
After her came a young man dressed like a Western tourist.
He was tall and very thin, with a pronounced Adam's apple, bulging bug eyes, and a mop of frizzy hair.
Upon leaving the car, he turned and offered his hand to a young lady still inside.
She wore white shorts, tennis shoes, and her hair up in a bun.
In her hand she held two tennis rackets.
Together the threesome entered the tennis stadium.
Fixated on the fortune-teller, Red-Haired Xuan barely noticed them.
Instead, he prattled on about his alleged luck in love and continued to cross-examine the old man.
What about money?!
At this Xuan drifted off into his own thoughts, and his past flashed before him.
When he was only nine, Xuan had lived with a distant paternal uncle whom the whole family praised for consent-ing magnanimously to take the boy in as his household servant.
It was not long, however, before the uncle brutally beat Xuan and threw him out of the house.
It seems that the boy had hollowed out a small hole in the washroom wall in order to spy on his uncle's wife while she bathed.
From that day onward Xuan lived on the streets, subsisting initially on a diet of wild plums and minnows that he caught in the Restored Sword Lake.
He sold roasted peanuts and newspapers on streetcorners, ran errands for a theater troupe, and hawked Tiger Balm aboard the trains.
Moving from unskilled job to unskilled job, Xuan spent so much time outdoors that the sun dyed his hair a streaky red, as red as the hair of a Westerner.
Lacking a formal education, he grew in street smarts and experience.
Finally, he secured a job as a ball boy at the tennis stadium.
There he was well treated, and his natural skill with a racket made him a favorite among the French and Vietnamese club members.
His game im-proved, and he dreamed of one day becoming as famous as super-stars like Chim or Ciao, if only fate would dispatch a talent scout to discover his genius.
Now, however, he accepted his lot as a simple ball boy.
Although the job was a lowly one, it held out a shred of hope for future advancement.
He saw no future in old-fashioned professions such as peanut vending, fruit picking, fishing, or run-ning errands for actors.
His participation in the Sporting Move-ment…the Popular Movement…made him feel strangely proud and self-important.
Look at my face, old man.
The fortune-teller examined Xuan's red-streaked hair, his reced-ing forehead, his oversized jaw, his long flute of an upper lip, and his comically thick ears.
Looks good.
Your future looks very good, indeed.
Damn it!
Suddenly a little boy ran out of the tennis stadium, calling his name.
Hey Xuan!
Where are you!?
She's here!
She needs a partner!
Red-Haired Xuan repeated quizzically.
Yes!
It's that bitch, Miss Civilization-the one with the bean pole husband.
And the other bitch, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer, is here as well.
Xuan stood up and barked at the fortune-teller:
Write it down for me, old man.
I'll pick it up this afternoon or tomorrow.
I've paid already, don't forget.
Time for a little ken co bans with the lovely lady.
As he dashed toward the stadium, Xuan flashed Miss Sugar Cane a flirty smile.
Good afternoon, Grandmother.
Good afternoon, Sir.
nodded their heads in acknowledg-ment, but Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer turned away in disgust.
The younger woman grinned knowingly at her husband.
he said sternly to Xuan.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer chimed in bit-terly.
Who are you calling Grandmother?
I'm no older than your mother.
Do I look old enough to have delivered your mother?
Yes, yes, Madame.
I was mistaken.
As the anger of this genuine Me Tay began to dissipate, Xuan grabbed his racket and took to the court.
Bop!
Bop!
The ball flew back and forth…Fixated on the creamy whiteness of Miss Civiliza-tion's thighs, Xuan failed to return several of her serves, thus creat-ing the impression that her game had improved.
Still angry from the earlier insult, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer gritted her teeth.
responded Mr. Civilization.
I must play sports.
I totally agree.
But do you really feel this way, Auntie?
Do you really like sports?
If so, it is a great victory for sports!
A harbinger of progress for Vietnam!
He spoke with an enthusiasm characteristic of numerous skinny and sickly men who celebrate the merits of sports without ever actually playing them.
In the same vein he displayed a contempt for foreign diplomas that was common among Vietnamese students who had returned from six or seven years in France without ever actually earning one.
In France he had grown close, so he claimed, to numerous well-known authors and statesmen-vice ministers and prime ministers-some so famous that their names had ap-peared in the Vietnamese press.
When he returned home, the Secu-rity Police ordered two agents to follow him around.
After three long months they concluded that his only secret activity involved fur-tively smoking Camel cigarettes.
-a fact suspiciously noted by the Security Office.
Through intensified sur-veillance they discovered that he had added his wife's surname, Van (literature), to his own name, Minh (light), hence creating the new name.
He saw the placement of his wife's name before his own as a simple act of gallantry and not, as others had surmised, as a sign of protest against patriarchy or an attempt to spearhead some sort of national or international reform movement.
In fact, it signified noth-ing at all.
Since people now referred to him as Mr. Civilization, he felt com-pelled to support the ongoing campaign for Europeanization.
To him this seemed a logical project, given the meaning of his new name.
Soon thereafter, he overheard that universal truth-a healthy soul demands a healthy body-and thus he became a passionate proponent of sports, targeting his wife first and then the world at large.
Unfortu-nately, his participation in the Europeanization campaign plunged him into such deep contemplation that he had precious little time for sports or for any exercise at all.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer's background is equally instructive.
As a teenager, she had been raped by a Western soldier while jour-neying outside of her village to attend an Armistice Day festival.
The soldier followed this unlawful rape with years of lawful rape-he married her, in other words.
Afterwards, the soldier rose to the post of deputy customs officer and died ten years later.
His death was not only a function of his fidelity to the state but of his unswerving fidelity to his wife-she literally screwed him to death.
Almost im-mediately, she remarried a young official (this one of domestic vin-tage) who passed away under similar circumstances two years later.
Because she had no known affairs, the tongues of poisonous snakes spread rumors that her poor husband had died of exhaustion while tending to her erotic flame-a flame fanned incessantly by her atten-tive admirers.
It was her marital fidelity, in other words, that drove her poor husband to his death.
Two French girls and a young Vietnamese man appeared court- side, and Xuan chivalrously offered up his racket.
When one of the French girls entered the changing room, Red-Haired Xuan abruptly disappeared.
The court buzzed with greetings and small talk.
Balls flew back and forth like bats chasing mosquitoes through the air.
Moments later, a Frenchman emerged from behind the changing room, pulling Red-Haired Xuan by the hair.
A small crowd gathered around as the Frenchman cursed Xuan and slapped him about the face and head.
Xuan, it seems, had been up to his old tricks:
spying on the French girl as she changed out of her skirt and into her tennis shorts.
The Tennis Association fired him on the spot, refusing to forward him the remainder of his monthly salary.
Watching the scene unfold, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer thought to herself that the people of Vietnam were not just stupid but pathetic as well.
Sighing deeply, she said to her nephew:
Who has never made a mistake in their youth?
We must forgive the foibles of the young.
Poor guy.
. Unlucky Stars:
Quan Phu and Thdi Tue Alas for Our People!
Civilization Ruined!
Police and Police Fines In the police station an officer escorted Red-Haired Xuan and the old fortune-teller across an empty courtyard and over to the door of a small ward.
He turned the lock and motioned for them to enter.
he said sarcastically.
Inside was a beggar together with his wife and child, a vagabond, and a female peddler with two baskets of stale noodles and rancid barbecue pork.
The peddler sat against the wall, deep in thought, between her two baskets.
The vagabond slept on the floor, snoring like a buzz saw.
The beggar's wife and child huddled together, lov-ingly picking at each other's body lice.
The door slammed shut, the lock clicked, and the patter of police boots faded into the dis-tance…A dim light illuminated the room.
Breathing heavily, the fortune-teller placed his mat and umbrella on the floor and sat down.
Only Red-Haired Xuan remained standing.
He scratched his sides and haughtily surveyed the room and its inhabitants.
he exclaimed, pursing his lips.
This jail's a snot hole.
exclaimed the fortune-teller.
Xuan corrected him.
The police station disgusted him.
It was a small branch office for the city's newly created Eighteenth Precinct.
Its seven officers in-cluded a French captain, a Vietnamese interpreter, an office man-ager, and four patrolmen.
The sixteen streets under its jurisdiction were located in a French neighborhood that was so peaceful and secure that violations of the law were as rare as winning lottery tickets.
So often did the four patrolmen speed without stopping through the sixteen streets that they grew to be talented cyclists.
One had recently won the Tour de Hanoi-Hai Phong.
Others had placed third and fourth in the Tour de Hanoi-San Tay, the Tour de Hanoi-B~c Ninh, and the Tour de Hanoi-Hanoi.
On those rare occa-sions when a peddler, a household servant, a cook, a rickshaw coo-lie, or a beggar did break a law-typically by pissing in the gutters or fighting in the streets-the patrolmen were never around.
Since two were needed at all times to staff the station, there were only two left over to patrol all sixteen streets, and patrolling had become little more than training for bicycle races.
In response to the economic crisis and mounting budget deficit, the Financial and Economic Congress of Indochina ordered the vari-ous police headquarters in the city to collect a minimum of 40,000 piasters in fines; this station owed 5,000 piasters.
The figure worried the French captain.
He knew that only the lowliest Annamese-servants, cooks, rickshaw coolies, and street singers-were ticketed in his precinct.
How could the station collect 5,000 piasters from such a pathetic collectivity?
After mulling the problem over for several days, he came up with a brilliant plan.
The next day all employees of the station were ordered to move their families to the sixteen streets.
Over the next several weeks the French captain was fined for letting his dog run in the street.
His wife was fined for lax management of her servant's house sweeping.
Fines were also collected from the interpreter, the office manager, the four patrolmen, the errand boy, and the gardener.
Their crimes included relieving themselves out-side, cycling without a light, quarreling in public, poor household hygiene, etc…They fined one another with a vengeance.
As the French captain was busy typing up some paperwork, a patrolman entered the office and reported a burglary at a nearby French residence.
It had occurred the previous night but was only recently detected.
The news annoyed the captain.
he said in French.
Nevertheless, he left for the crime scene with the interpreter, leaving the office manager in charge of the station.
The office manager yawned like a merchant in the midst of a recession.
l he called out glumly.
Officer Min dCY nodded gravely like a drunk and despondent Confucian scholar.
Very pathetic!
the office manager blurted out.
Very much so!
Everyone is so civilized nowadays!
It's a damn shame!
The streets used to be filled with depraved, uncouth men and women-people who'd spit and piss wherever they pleased, people who'd beat each other up in public.
Remember the days when four people rode together on a single bicycle!?
Remember when people used to curse each other in public and smack their neighbors around?
Houses were filthy with toilet water; dogs ran wild in the streets.
Bicycles without headlights were everywhere.
Now everything has changed.
Even rickshaw coolies obey the law, nowadays!
They never for-get their lights!
They never stop in the middle of the road!
No one even curses anyone's ancestors anymore!
The old order has broken down completely!
Kids today don't even know how to talk dirty!
They're all so prim and proper.
It's the newspapers.
Exactly.
The newspapers have civilized everyone.
It's not right!
It's inexcusable!
'Tm an officer manager!
That's even worse, damn it!
Of course I am!
After patrolling our sixteen streets four times a day without stopping to write a single ticket…I've never been in better shape.
It would be a waste not to compete!
But we've got to stop ticketing each other's families.
Five thousand piasters!
The office manager stood up and wagged his finger at Patrolman Min dO'.
You cannot disobey an order, officer!
Look at the wife of the French captain.
Oh no!
I told her not to keep the house so clean and to let the toilet clog up from time to time.
I ordered her to let the children throw litter in the street-anything so that Patrolman Min toa could ticket her, which would then allow me to ticket his wife in return.
But the kids are as well behaved as little Buddhas, and the woman keeps the house spotless.
The office manager saw that he had struck a nerve and tried to change the subject.
He ordered Min dO' to fetch the defendants from the jail for questioning.
As Officer Min dO' opened the door to the ward, the fortune-teller was scolding Red-Haired Xuan.
See!
That's what you get for being such a troublemaker.
You get arrested!
For me it makes no difference because this month my stars-Quan Phu and Thai Tue'-are unlucky anyway.
They have foretold that, sooner or later during the month, I will be spending some time in court.
I don't give a damn either, you old coot!
Beating an old man is a violent offense.
Last time they took me to the Central Police Station!
Now there's a real station.
Half a dozen pistol-packing French officers with huge mustaches and chests covered with medals!
Hundreds of policemen with white truncheons and huge chains.
The ward has an iron bar like a tiger cage and holds hundreds of people, not to mention thousands of flies and mosquitoes!
This jail is just a tiny snot hole.
Let's go!
Min dO' shouted.
It's time for interrogations.
Everyone stood up except the vagabond, who was snoring thun-derously.
Officer Min dO' gave him a kick.
he moaned.
he said sulkily.
First, they interrupt my sleep to bring me to jail, and now they wake me up again to release me.
The prisoners filed out of the cell, through the courtyard, and into the front office.
Because Red-Haired Xuan was respectably dressed in French-style shorts, tennis shoes, and a sleeveless undershirt, the office manager turned to him first.
the fortune-teller blurted out.
Xuan protested.
I never hit him, and there wasn't enough time to strangle him.
The manager rapped his fist on the table.
Quiet!
Quiet!
I'm asking the questions here!
I'll get to the bottom of this!
You!
He ripped me off, Sir.
I gave him one hao for a fortune reading, but his predictions were completely wrong, and he refused to give me a refund.
I only want my money back.
The manager turned to the fortune-teller.
Did you read his for-tune?
I gave him a discount, Your Honor.
One hao is a bargain.
Not true, Your Honor!
The manager frowned at the fortune-teller.
The future is still in the future, Your Honor.
It has yet to arrive.
I have studied the art of fortune-telling for ten years, and my predic-tions are rarely off the mark.
And I am never completely wrong!
The manager frowned at Red-Haired Xuan.
the fortune-teller continued.
The fame and fortune quadrant looks very good.
You are a real fire breather.
The manager frowned at Red-Haired Xuan one more time.
This fortune-teller has real talent.
A le!
You committed the crime of hit-ting an old person!
You are fined one d'Ong and eight hao!
Release the fortune-teller immediately!
Out on the street a car pulled up in front of the station.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer entered the front office and smiled at the officers, who smiled back like merchants greeting a rich customer.
Because Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer often let her dog loose, she had been ticketed at least once on each of the precinct's sixteen streets.
To the police, in other words, she was like a regular cus-tomer of a failing business.
she replied, pointing at Xuan.
The manager rubbed his hands together.
Red-Haired Xuan looked on in amazement as Officer Min dO' wrote up a receipt.
he said respectfully.
You will know soon enough…when I get you home!
the fortune-teller exclaimed.
Xuan replied.
You are indeed a living saint!
asked Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
Is that so?
Please come to my house and read my fortune!
She handed over the money and grabbed the receipt.
After fetch-ing his belongings from the cell, the fortune-teller followed Xuan and Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer into her car.
The office manager saw them off at the gate.
Thank you so much!
Son of Heaven, Son of Buddha The Reincarnation of the Famous Soothsayer Quy C6c Ta A Suspicious Case The car honked like the grunt of a wild boar.
Moments later a man-servant appeared, opened both wings of the iron gate, and waved the car into the courtyard.
An electric streetlight overhanging the outer wall of the compound illuminated a huge Western-style villa surrounded by a massive garden of willows, hibiscus, cacti, spica plants, terra-cotta pillars, and rows upon rows of strange flowers.
The garden excited Xuan.
He sensed the beginning of a new chapter of his life.
The fortune-teller smirked and elbowed Xuan in the ribs as if to remind him that he had recently predicted as much.
Sitting beside the placid chauffeur, Xuan dared not respond.
The car pulled up in front of a twelve-step cement stairway that led to the front door of the house.
The driver got out of the car and opened the back door.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer stepped out, carrying a dog, a Japanese umbrella, and a leather purse.
She was followed by the old fortune-teller with his box, his umbrella, and his straw mat.
Xuan exited last, and the car returned to the garage.
A woman, dressed as a servant, scampered down the steps to fetch the luggage for her mistress.
And where is the little master?
asked Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
Excuse me, Mistress.
A bath?
Without waiting for an answer, she turned back to address Miss Three.
Miss Three!
Why do you bathe him out here in the yard?
That's what he wanted.
In a giant brass tub sat an obese little boy with the face of a half-wit.
Although over a meter in height, he splashed about in the water like a three-year-old child.
The ground around the tub was littered with toys:
a stuffed dog, a doll, a car, a plane, a trumpet…Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer put down her dog.
Taking a bath, my sweet?
What a good boy!
Did anyone beat you while mother was out?
Lulu!
Up!
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer whistled twice.
The dog sat up unsteadily on his two hind legs and held out his front paws.
He wagged his tongue to greet the little boy in the bath.
Slapping at the water rhythmically with both hands, the boy looked at the dog and frowned.
he screamed.
Here, here…Mother apologizes.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer hesitated for a moment.
Go ahead and take your bath.
All right, as you wish.
Stark naked, the little boy stood up in the bath and kissed his mother.
But, good God!
The little master was certainly not little anymore!
The scene possessed a certain bizarre fascination for the onlookers; it was at least as interesting as a pornographic photo.
was already in working order.
explained Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
The fortune-teller understood this to mean that the boy had been born only after his mother had prayed in dozens of pagodas.
Xuan, on the other hand, was flabbergasted.
As soon as Mrs. Deputy Cus- toms Officer entered the house, the little master began to scream and sob.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer shouted from within the house.
The boy continued to yell.
Little Master wants to go in!
Miss Three!
urged Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
Mrs. Three picked the child up and carried him into the house, piggyback style.
The enormous little master gyrated up and down as if riding a horse.
Gitty-up!
Gitty-up!
Xuan was so disgusted he could hardly bear it.
he murmured to himself.
Xuan and the fortune-teller entered the living room.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer pointed them toward the sofa.
She left into the next room.
While they waited, the gigantic little boy appeared at the door wearing a shirt but no pants.
He poked his head in and out of the door and giggled to himself like an imbecile.
His silk shirt, the color of chicken fat, displayed large red insignias on both sides that were supposed to ward off evil spirits.
Around his neck was a thick gold choker on which hung a small pendant and a huge gold medallion.
The plaintive wail of Miss Three echoed from the other room:
Master Blessing!
Master Blessing!
said the fortune-teller furtively.
Xuan nodded in agreement.
the fortune-teller continued.
Xuan whispered, covering his mouth with his hand.
Before Xuan could respond, he heard the voice of Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
My boy!
My beloved boy!
Put on your clothes.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer entered the living room.
She had taken off her gown, brassiere, and head-dress and had put on an utterly transparent silk shirt and paper-thin pants.
This made her seem like a passionate adherent of nudism, while it made Xuan feel dirty and uncouth.
The old fortune-teller stood up respectfully.
she asked.
Fine.
I'm not sure.
In that case I will do your physiognomy.
That's fine.
Great Madame's physiognomy is quite encouraging.
Of the twelve sectors of your face, only one is of any concern-the one that relates to your husband.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer frowned.
What do you mean?
What's wrong with my husbands?
The dep-uty customs officer was always very good to me.
And so was the senior clerk.
He was very kindhearted.
Right before the senior clerk died, he said that he still loved me.
Yes, Great Madame.
Yes, you are right.
But, according to modern traditions, one can enjoy as many husbands as one likes, as long as they are kind.
Your character, Great Madame, is very humane.
Your financial sector looks good.
Your land sector looks even better.
Also good.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer frowned.
Why so?
I have two children.
My Jannette is in high school.
She will graduate soon.
And little Master Blessing is growing very fast.
In three months he will be eleven.
Great Madame, there is an old saying:'One son counts, ten girls don't.' According to the old teachings, daughters are worthless, no matter how abundant.
I see.
Great Madame.
Certainly not!
I'm determined…I pledge on the souls of my deputy customs officer and my senior clerk to remain a widow.
It is as I said, Great Madame.
Your physiognomic skill is great.
What about the fate of little Master Blessing?
Buddhas from the Perfume Pagoda have blessed me with his presence for over ten years already.
Great Madame.
That sector is the best.
I predict a life of great leisure.
Not to worry!
Not to worry!
Just look at his physiognomy!
He will live a long life.
Great!
Great!
Great Madame.
Yes, Great Madame.
Fine.
You should leave, as it will soon be dark.
Please come back in a day or two and do a horoscope for me!
Where is Miss Three?
Give him one dong for rickshaw fare.
Yes, yes.
The old fortune-teller picked up his umbrella, straw mat, and box and left.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer turned to Xuan:
You!
The question caught Xuan off guard; he felt confused and a little frightened.
Yes.
Do not call yourself'child' to me!
I am a civilized woman.
I do not discriminate.
Poor you!
Do you have a wife?
That's great!
Uh…I mean that's a real shame!
Anyway, these are difficult times; you should not get married too early.
Not yet, Madame.
I am a humane woman.
I feel great compassion.
And you de-serve my compassion.
You were working and suddenly lost your job.
It must be terrible for you.
Why were you acting so silly in that changing room?
I know that young people are often frisky, but you must first determine whether the other person agrees or not.
Xuan said innocently.
Now, now.
I really don't know.
Xuan contrived the most innocent expression he could muster.
Xuan's face turned red.
he stammered.
I don't even know what he accused me of.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer stood dumbfounded and swal-lowed her disappointment.
She recalled her embarrassments and mistakes in the past.
Ever since she had been raped, those rare and semiconscious sensa-tions-sensations that were strange and very difficult to describe-continued to cling to her as a shadow clings to a body.
Gradually, they had become her obsession.
She desired to be ravished again, but the opportunity never arose.
Instead, she had been forced to ravish her husbands.
By reading the novel The Tearful History of Kim Anh, she learned of the existence of a provincial monk who claimed to be a Buddha who could guarantee children for women who prayed at his pagoda.
After searching for and eventually finding the pagoda, she was embarrassed to discover that the story was a hoax.
Although the ministrations of the monk did not pan out, she eventu-ally received a son from her second husband, Mr. Senior Clerk.
But now.
Examining Xuan's honest face, she came to the depressing realiza-tion that he had probably been falsely accused.
Just as her sadness began turning to anger, an idea suddenly popped into her head.
Go upstairs and wait for me to take my bath.
Xuan obeyed…He followed her upstairs and into another guest room.
Sit here and wait for me.
She left into the bathroom a few steps away from where Xuan sat.
She undressed, put on a rubber bathing cap to cover her hair, and turned on the water.
Water cascaded down from the iron shower-head.
As she washed, she made conspicuously loud slapping noises on her stomach and thighs.
Getting no response, she knelt down and peered through the keyhole of the bathroom door.
Xuan was looking attentively at the pictures in the album.
He remained in his seat.
she thought to herself.
She finished bathing and opened the door.
Enough already.
You can go.
I plan to hire you tomorrow.
Tomorrow, go to the European-ization Tailor Shop and ask for Mrs. Civilization.
I will put in a word for you.
Enough!
You are not very smart!
Go away!
Tomorrow you will see.
Red-Haired Xuan left, his heart full of hope.
He was oblivious to the fact that she momentarily despised him, just as she despised all men who were truly moral.
The Anger of Hoqn Thu Art for Life's Sake The Products of Europeanization following the instructions he had received from Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer, Red-Haired Xuan arrived in front of a modern-looking tailor shop for women at precisely eight the next morning.
He dared not enter immediately, however, for he could not be sure if this was, in fact, the Europeanization Tailor Shop of Mrs. Civilization.
Red-Haired Xuan's limited education had endowed him with the capac-ity to make out a laundry list but not to understand the ultramodern and largely illegible lettering favored by today's advertising design-ers.
As Xuan looked on, workers were putting up a new storefront sign.
Five bizarre-looking pieces of newly painted red wood lay drying on the pavement.
One worker had propped a ladder up against the wall.
A younger man, whose rolled-up shirtsleeves indi-cated that he meant business, barked out orders and issued occa-sional rebukes.
The tailor shop was remarkably swank.
Three wooden ma nO' canh imported from Europe stood poised behind its large plate-glass window.
Although they had been made to resemble beautiful European women, the shop owner had skillfully arranged turbans and strands of black hair on their heads so as to make them look more Vietnamese.
Each mannequin displayed a different article of clothing.
One sported a swallow-tailed coat, the kind that girls and young women often wear to go out.
Another wore a swimming suit, the kind that girls and young women wear on the beach in order to display the art of their bodies.
A third wore lingerie, the kind worn by powerful women so as to remind their husbands and lovers not to forget their most sacred of masculine duties.
Xuan inched toward the five wooden letters on the pavement.
Try as he might, he was unable to make out the specific letter that each was supposed to symbolize.
There was a round one with a hole in the middle and a strange square one with two round holes in the middle.
Even more bizarre were three triangle-shaped ones with holes in the middle!
Ever since he was six, Red-Haired Xuan's coarse mind knew that a triangular shape with a hole in the middle could only signify one thing-one very dirty thing.
He smiled to himself.
The young man with the rolled-up sleeves began shouting at his workers.
No!
No!
This one goes first!
asked the worker, confusedly.
The young man scolded him again.
A triangle…with a hole, damn it!
You idiot!
The right-side up triangle is a U.
The upside-down one is an A.
What kind of craftsman are you?
Don't you know anything about art?
Nail the upside-down triangle first, then put the right-side-up one after it.
That's A followed by U-giving us AU-Europe in other words.
Then put up the square piece with the two holes-that's an H.
Then the round piece with a hole in the middle-that's an 0.
Then another upside-down triangle-I mean another A.
That spells HOA-ization.
Together, it all means Europeanization!
Get it?
Despite the insult, Xuan was happy to have found the shop.
he murmured to himself.
A moment later a young man appeared wearing a European hik-ing outfit.
He approached the young man overseeing the design of the storefront sign.
They shook hands and greeted each other noisily in French.
My God!
Of course, but remember that you are a journalist.
Your duty is to help enhance the knowledge of the common people so that one day they too may understand art.
I, on the other hand, am an artist.
Still not enough.
There is much work to be done.
Ours are a lazy people.
They do not want to think deeply; they rarely try to compre-hend the vast, complicated problems that those of us in the fine arts must confront.
Of course, the more difficult a work of art is to understand, the more valuable it is.
For example, in Italy and in Germany, I hear, those painters whose works are completely incom-prehensible are worshiped as saints.
When the dictators Hitler and Mussolini took power, they were so jealous of these artists that they threw them in jail.
Due to the low level of our society, we artists must take responsi-bility for the reform of women's fashions-by far the easiest genre of fine arts to understand.
How do you like these ultramodern letters?
They are my latest creation!
Aren't they unusual?
The fact that the most common people cannot understand this style of lettering only confirms its sophistica-tion.
Someday I hope to craft letters that are so very, very modem that even intellectuals cannot read them.
While eavesdropping on this conversation, Xuan caught a glimpse of Mrs. Civilization through the storefront window.
He gingerly en-tered the shop.
The two young men followed him inside, still en-grossed in conversation.
Xuan said politely.
Mrs. Civilization nodded to Xuan and shook hands with the other two.
Please sit down, Monsieurs.
she asked the journalist.
I've come for an important reason.
She cut him off briskly and turned to Xuan.
And what about you?
Xuan blushed and rubbed his hands together.
Mrs. Civilization interrupted him.
Quiet!
Yes, Ma'am!
Fine.
Mrs. Civilization gestured to the journalist to enter the salon in-side the shop.
Xuan sat down on an upholstered chair near the door.
Despite his nervousness, he took advantage of the rare opportunity to admire those secret aspects of the gentler sex that only the Europe-anization movement dares to display openly.
It was truly a party for his eyes-provocative breasts cupped in brassieres of silk and lace, thighs cased in sheer silk stockings and all manner of slips and panties, each capable of provoking lust in men well into their seven-ties.
Huge colorful rolls of solid and floral-patterned silk gave the shop an especially lively ambiance.
There was also a dressing room covered on three sides by velvet drapes and another room in which male and female tailors worked, busy as bees, before a row of sew-ing machines.
A poorly made-up middle-aged woman appeared outside the glass window.
She gazed inside for several minutes before entering the shop.
The shop owner greeted her warmly.
Can I help you, Madame?
The customer thought for a long while.
Mrs. Civilization replied glibly.
Today we must all reform our wardrobes to keep up with fashion.
The conven- tional trends in makeup, for example, tend to make people look older.
We must replace them!
As you know, Madame, one can no longer remain ignorant of the latest fads in beauty maintenance and hope to maintain family happiness.
The woman nodded and opened her eyes wide in agreement.
Yes!
Yes!
You are absolutely right!
Young girls today dress even more provocatively than wives of Westerners in the past!
So mod-ern!
So slutty!
My god!
They are so beautiful compared to me, and my husband is obsessed by them.
Her voice rose to an almost hysterical pitch.
Mrs. Civilization tried to calm her down.
Now, now!
But my husband spends every night chasing after those modem sluts!
The answer is simple, Madame.
If you can't beat them, you must join them.
Yes!
Yes!
I can dress like that too, of course!
Who cares if people call me an old whore!
It's all your doing anyway.
Mrs. Civilization shrugged her shoulders.
Madame, our society progresses according to the basic laws of evolution.
During this deeply reformist era everything conservative will be eliminated!
In that case, Madame, I would like to order a custom-made outfit right away, the most modern possible!
Of course!
Mrs. Civilization drew the attention of her customer to a row of mannequins.
See…here…The many innovative styles dis-played in our shop were all designed by well-known art students.
If you please, Madame, the sign under each mannequin explains the meaning of the outfit it displays.
For example, this one is called'Prom-ise.' A girl may wear this outfit to reassure her boyfriend that she promises to show up for their appointment that evening.
This one is called'Win His Heart.' Men are like putty in the hands of girls who wear this outfit.
And here, of course, we have'Innocence.' This one is for'Commanders of Internal Affairs' -housewives, in other words.
This one is called'Women's Rights,' for wives whose husbands are afraid of them.
This one, 'Resolute Faithfulness,' is for widows deter-mined to honor their late husbands and remain unmarried.
This one, 'Hesitation,' is for widows who are somewhat less determined.
And here we have our newest model, finished several days ago.
Conquest consisted of a transparent black blouse and pair of pants over a set of black panties and a black co6c xe.
It also exposed the arms, deep cleavage, thighs, and legs of the beautiful wooden woman that exhibited it.
Mrs. Civilization stared at the outfit with a look of utter satisfaction.
The customer, however, appeared unconvinced.
At that moment the journalist and artist joined the conversation.
the journalist said.
the artist chimed in.
the customer protested.
the very concept of clothing has changed.
We developed this particular style following the concep-tual lead of famous European designers.
Clothing should enhance and embellish one's natural beauty, not cover it up.
Mrs. Civilization peered uneasily at the doubtful expression on the face of her customer.
It may seem too modern for you now, but just wait until the next time your husband plans to go on one of his evening outings.
Yes!
the customer nodded.
Madame, what is family happiness if not the happiness of hus-bands and wives?
You're right!
We have designed new styles of undergarments for this same reason.
Never mind what those old-fashioned moralists say about us.
We do not simply reform the outside.
Where are they?
Mrs. Civilization turned around and gestured toward a glass case.
She reached in and pulled out a pile of panties, brassieres, long slips, and mini-slips.
I call this one'Coquette.' And these are known as'Wait-a- Minute' panties.
This is the'Happiness' slip.
Here is what we call the'Stop-Those-Hands' brassiere.
Feel free to look them over.
The female customer nodded her head vigorously.
Yes, I will do as you say!
I will Europeanize myself and follow the ways of civiliza-tion!
I vow to dress progressively!
Mrs. Civilization pointed to the artist.
Here, Madame, is your tailor!
He was originally a student at the Indochinese Fine Art Col-lege.
The artist bowed his head very low.
Please follow me, Madame.
They disappeared behind the velvet drapes of the changing room.
Xuan remained in his chair.
Mrs. Civilization turned to address the journalist.
Monsieur, your newspaper cannot possibly propose to charge more for advertising.
You are wrong, Madame.
Our newspaper has more and more readers everyday.
Our prestige is constantly under attack by conser-vative forces-another clear benefit to you.
That is only natural, Monsieur.
No!
It is you who calls for renovation.
No!
It's not true!
Haven't you noticed the recent progressive evolu-tion of our society?
It's all over the daily papers!
So many divorces!
So many cases of adultery!
Girls chasing boys, men getting bored with their wives, officials leaving their posts to pursue modem girls…It's great for your business.
Newspapers clearly have a huge influence.
At that moment Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer entered the shop.
Red-Haired Xuan stood up.
Mrs. Civilization left the journalist alone to contemplate the influence of his newspaper.
My niece!
Aunt and niece huddled together in the far corner of the room.
As the journalist put on his hat and walked angrily out of the shop, he grasped one of life's basic truths:
journalism is a wretched profes-sion.
Red-Haired Xuan continued to wait.
I need you to hire him.
I want to keep him around while they are building the tennis court at my house.
But the court won't be finished for a while.
You have a point.
She paused a moment and then whispered to her niece:
How about this…before the tennis court is finished, we could…in that way, we won't waste all that much.
Just like that, Red-Haired Xuan became a member of the move-ment for social reform.
A Lesson in Progress for Red-Haired Xuan Two Views about Family and Society A Horned Husband The clock struck twelve.
drove to a restaurant for lunch, accom-panied by several modern-looking women and a handful of students recently returned from studies abroad.
The tailors and seamstresses also went out to eat together.
Out on the street cicadas hummed in the sapindus trees, disturbing the afternoon naps of high officials.
said Red-Haired Xuan to himself.
He paced back and forth, trying to commit to memory the instructions he had received from his new boss.
Before you help us to practice sports, we need you to assist in the Europeanization of society.
Keep in mind that from this day forward you play an important part in the Movement for Social Reform.
From now on your efforts will determine whether our society grows more civilized or degenerates into barbarity!
Seeing Xuan's blank reaction to the Master's convoluted advice, the Mistress tried to put it more simply.
What he means is that, if you find yourself with free time, use this feather duster to tidy up the place.
Start with the spools of silk and then do the clothes and the mannequins.
Cleanliness is impor-tant.
Yes, Sir.
The designer tapped his brow, searching for the right words.
he stammered.
Try to understand!
In order to please the customers' ears, you must remember all the names.
This is the duty of the vang dcr.
The designer opened his eyes wide and stuck his finger in Xuan's face.
Of course not!
That's too much to expect from the likes of you.
Only French tay 0' like me can be trusted to carry out such a sacred duty!
This is my work!
Mine!
The designer dragged Xuan over to a mannequin.
Sleeveless and neckless means Puberty!
Xuan repeated after him like a parrot cramming for an exam.
Sleeveless and neckless means Puberty!
The designer nodded and directed Xuan to another mannequin.
Strapless, showing the top half of the breasts means Innocence!
Strapless, showing the top half of the breasts means Innocence!
Red-Haired Xuan repeated it again and again.
Very good!
If you learn these by heart, you should be able eventu-ally to recognize the lettering on the signs.
Soon you will know every style ever devised by the fine art of fashion design.
From now l.
G6ul (taste).
on the Europeanization Movement will hinge on your intelligent mind, so pay attention.
This outfit, Resolute Faithfulness, is for widows determined not to remarry.
Hence, neither the top nor the bottom is especially revealing; the collar is like a lotus leaf, draped over the bulging outlines of the breasts.
With Hesitation, on the other hand, the collar is designed to cover one side of the breast and reveal the other.
Good.
Mrs. Civilization added.
You will stay here and mind the shop.
With that, they left the shop.
The designer's comments confirmed to Red-Haired Xuan that he was no more than an errand boy in the Europeanization Movement for Social Reform.
While this fact did not disturb him, he was miffed that no one remembered that errand boys need lunch and an after-noon rest like other people.
He was starving, in fact.
He had hoped to meet Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer, but she had driven away long ago with her beloved dog.
In the now quiet and empty shop he paced back and forth, mur-muring to himself.
He began dusting off the mannequins.
Like a child studying Chi-nese characters by heart, Xuan read each label several times out loud to himself.
God-daIIU these clothes!
What the hell is this one?
Promise, huh?
Tight waist, wide at the chest and ass…got it!
Tight waist, wide chest and ass is Promise!
Breasts, arms, and thighs exposed-Conquest!
Breasts, arms, and thighs exposed-Conquest!
Xuan dropped the feather duster and bent down to pick it up.
Strapless, showing the top half of the breasts, is Innocence!
At that moment a young woman pushed open the door and en-tered the shop.
She stared at Xuan in surprise.
Red-Haired Xuan hid the feather duster behind his back.
Me?
he said solemnly.
What can I do for you, Miss?
'Tm sorry, but I can't wait a minute.
I want my husband!
I want reform!
I want Europeanization!
Red-Haired Xuan stood frozen in place, as wooden looking as the mannequins.
Yes!
Right.
But, there is.
He is a tailor known as Mr. Indochinese Fine Arts.
As a columnist for the women's newspapers, he uses the pen name Mr. ILL-it stands for'I Love Ladies!' All social reformers know of him.
Ah, ah, yes, of course!
He just stepped out.
Yes, please relax, Madame.
Please tell me what you think, Monsieur.
Red-Haired Xuan glanced at her simple do dili.
Her collar was not shaped like a lotus leaf.
Her white pants were plain and unrevealing.
Her unpretentious shoes were made of black velvet.
Given his re-cent realization that the most modern clothes were the ones that looked the most absurd, her outfit seemed rather old-fashioned.
Madame, you look honest and proper only.
Xuan nodded insistently.
Very old-fashioned, in fact, not Europeanized at all!
The outfit seems especially dated for the wife of Mr. ILL…Don't you know that your husband has designed many of the newest and most ele-gant styles?
The woman ground her teeth together.
My husband oppresses me.
Madame, that is truly a roadblock on the road of evolution!
Your only course of action is to order the outfit known as Women's Rights.
You are a highly educated man.
You speak as eloquently as French literature!
Red-Haired Xuan bowed low.
The woman smiled.
Madame, what is family happiness if not the happiness of hus-bands and wives?
You're right!
Just as Red-Haired Xuan's speaking machine was shifting into high gear, the door to the shop swung open and the designer ran in, followed by the journalist.
The designer raised his arms up over his head.
Oh!
He turned and gesticulated wildly at the journalist, who was busy thinking of how the designer was probably jealous because his wife was speaking to Red-Haired Xuan.
You are right.
Don't you see what I mean?
My wife?
My own wife?
My own wife dresses in the new modern way?
My God!
White pants?
My God!
Hair parted on the side and heart-shaped lipstick?
Oh my god!
What a slut!
What a loose woman!
Red-Haired Xuan raised his hand to interrupt.
The designer's wife started to grow angry.
Stop being so stupid!
You call for renovation!
You campaign for Europeanization!
You de-mand that women reform themselves according to your wishes, to make themselves up following your methods!
What about me?
Yes, I am your wife, but I am also a woman!
Everyone can see that I am a woman!
Does anyone dare to say otherwise?
said the designer.
He gestured for her to be quiet.
I won't shut up!
Shut up, you idiot!
Don't you know that there are different kinds of women?
When we campaign for the reform of women, we mean other people's wives and sisters, not our own!
Don't you under-stand?
It's one thing for other women to reform, but you're my wife.
Mrs. ILL protested.
The designer turned to the journalist for help.
As your husband has explained already, when we speak about women, we mean the wives and sisters of other people, not our own wives and sisters.
My family follows the old traditions.
Our women cannot be allowed to wear modern clothes or to go dancing one day and to some festival the next.
The journalist's oh-so-progressive words inspired the designer.
Oh my god!
screamed the designer's wife.
replied the journalist, raising his two hands.
added the designer bitterly.
Every- thing is so simple for your kind.
You demand one fashion today and a different one the next!
What a waste!
You are nothing more than a parasite!
After you squander all of your miserable husband's money on new clothes, what will you do when another outfit strikes your fancy?
Prostitute yourself?
Don't be such a copycat!
The designer thrust his finger into Xuan's face.
I caught you in the act!
You were trying to corrupt my wife, to lead her astray with your silver tongue!
You are trying to destroy my family!
Watch out!
He grabbed his wife by the arm and dragged her to the door.
he scowled.
Go home and take off those white pants, immediately!
The journalist grabbed his briefcase and followed the couple out of the shop.
Alone in the shop, Red-Haired Xuan was overcome with confu-sion.
He simply could not follow the logic of the reform-minded tailor.
Just as he began to wonder if his altercation with the designer might cost him his new job, an elegantly dressed middle-aged clerk entered the shop.
He addressed Xuan in a low whisper.
Sir!
Red-Haired Xuan rubbed his eyes to check if he might be dream-ing.
The man spoke to him again.
Yes, it's true.
asked Xuan fearfully.
Red-Haired Xuan reached out to touch the man's head.
You must be joking.
Sir, I am speaking figuratively.
It's true.
According to the French, husbands such as I are known as horned husbands.
My wife is so immoral.
I am a senior clerk at the post office.
That is all you need to know.
I am also a relative of Mr. Civilization.
I was told by Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer that you are intelligent, educated, and generous.
Very little, Sir, I promise.
I don't know if I dare.
I beg of you.
Help me, and I will pay you ten piasters!
The man slipped a five piaster note into Xuan's hand and moving furtively-as all horned husbands tend to do-he left the shop.
Tennis Court Problems Again Life in a Civilized Family Red-Haired Xuan Leaps into Science Three people stood at the window peering down into the yard.
exclaimed Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
Three workers and almost nothing has been done!
said Mr. Civilization.
added Mrs. Civilization.
The tennis court was being made from fragments of brick and several layers of bich toong.
The hard rectangular surface was sur-rounded by dug-up lemon trees, rose bushes, and piles of grass and weeds.
In addition to her newfound passion for sports, there was another reason why Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer had ordered her flower garden dug up and replaced by a tennis court.
But it was a reason known only to God.
Almost eight hundred piasters for a tennis court.
Mrs. Civilization said reassur-ingly.
Most sports clubs hold dozens of fund-raisers before they can build a single court.
Because he assumed that Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was building the court out of passion for sports, on the one hand, and love for her niece-his wife-on the other, Mr. Civilization felt compelled to reassure her as well.
So what if it's a little expen-sive.
This court might change your life.
Perhaps your house will become like a club-a meeting place where upper-class intellectuals gather together to improve and help civilize our society!
It will not only enhance your reputation, Auntie, but it will improve the fu-ture prospects of little brother Blessing.
Children today need a variety of civilizing influences.
They need physical instruction as well as spiritual guidance.
He spoke elegantly, fluently, and, for someone who didn't actu-ally believe what he was saying, with great conviction.
Although Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer failed to grasp his point, she was pleased because it sounded, at least, like they were of the same mind.
But why in the world did he think that her tennis court would help civilize the society?
They returned to the living room.
said Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer.
her niece replied.
said Mrs. Deputy Customs Offi-cer.
I think you are right!
her nephew-in-law added.
Some people are cursed with bad luck, but fortune follows him wherever he goes.
It must be fate.
Too bad he was orphaned as a child.
Mr. Civilization protested.
What does he have to complain about?
Ball boys and tailor's assistants can also contribute to social progress!
Moreover, if he ever makes a name for himself, being an orphan will only enhance his reputation!
Who cares if the son of a rich mandarin gains fame and fortune?
He ought to be proud to be a member of the common people; they are re-spected the world over!
The aristocracy and the bourgeois are out nowadays, and the common people are in.
Hooray for the common people!
The more he spoke, the more Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer found her nephew-in-law to be civilized, up-to-date, and more than deserving of the exalted title foreign exchange student, even though he had never earned the diploma.
She yawned and hugged Lulu in a passionate embrace.
Where is everyone?
Mr. Civilization leaned back in his chair and looked up at the ceiling.
He put the eighteenth Ang-le cigarette of the day into his mouth and struck a match.
Being a fashionable woman, his wife put both of her feet up on the low coffee table.
she repeated.
asked Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
I think you've met them before, Auntie.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer replied.
She buzzed for the cook, who entered promptly.
she ordered.
Open wide the main en-trance!
Chain the dogs.
Gusts from the ceiling fan rustled the cigarette paper-thin clothes covering the white skin of the two fashionable ladies.
The ticking of the clock drew attention to the silence in the room.
Looking like the soul of Vietnam on the road of evolution and liberation, Mrs. Dep-uty Customs Officer hugged her French puppy and gazed up dream-ily at the ceiling fan.
, on the other hand, looked worn-out from the crushing burdens of pursuing life's four essential pleasures (eating, sleeping, making love, and going to the toilet) in a civilized way and promoting populism.
The doorbell rang out, jolting the hostess from her chair.
Moments later, an old man entered the room.
The Civilizations stood up, and Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer offered a warm greeting.
Welcome!
Before he could reply, Grandpa H6ng was seized by a fit of violent coughing.
It sounded as if he were choking on a water pipe.
Al-though it was the middle of summer, he wore a padded coat and heavy leather shoes.
He smelled of peppermint oil and wore several medals pinned to his chest.
Mr. Civilization looked uneasily at his wife, embarrassed at the fact that Grandpa H6ng was his father.
In the past he had been a senior clerk-an exemplary official and loyal citizen of the protector-ate.
He was also a kind-hearted father who feared and slavishly indulged his spoiled children.
Following retirement, the state ac-knowledged his thirty years of service to the king and the country by awarding him the H6ng Lo T,t Thie'u Khanh medaJ.
Like many Vietnamese of the era, he was also an opium addict.
Grandpa H6ng's only ambition in life was to become a great-grandpa.
In pursuit of this worthy goal, he contrived to behave like an old man on his last legs, although in truth he was no more than fifty.
Whenever he went out, he wore a heavy ba dir xuy, whether it was winter or not.
To advertise his senility, he coughed uncon-trollably during rickshaw rides and always made a point to miscalcu-late the fare.
If anyone tried to speak with him while he was prepar-ing his opium, he would close his eyes, frown, and say:
I know!
I know!
What a pain!
He said this as a matter of principle, even as he listened attentively.
education does not come from a diploma.
He was also thrilled that his son had become a revolutionary within the prevailing legal framework.
This allowed Mr. Civilization to radically reform society without being jailed or executed.
He was especially proud that his son had not become one of those silly revolutionaries who aspires to bring happi-ness to the people without teaching them about dancing or ultra-modern clothes.
Like many old and stupid people, Grandpa H6ng did not allow his utter ignorance of civilization to prevent him from supporting its merits wholeheartedly.
Just as he was faithful to Great France, Grandpa H6ng was fiercely loyal to his son, a fidelity he demonstrated by adopting all of his son's many foreign affectations, such as using the pronouns toa and moa.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer offered her arm to Grandpa H6ng.
With her assistance, he took his seat-but gingerly, like a genuine great-grandpa.
he asked his son.
Mr. Civilization answered, as if not addressing anyone in particular.
Moa has some business with toa.
Our via seems on the verge of…going…of leaving us.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer asked.
Grandpa H6ng coughed for several moments.
It's very serious!
Mrs. Civili-zation said angrily.
Grandpa H6ng explained apologetically.
The sooner, the better.
Why continue living when you can no longer eat or sleep and all you can do is whine and wet the bed?
It will also be a sign of bad luck for our family if I die before the old man.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer asked, stifling a nervous giggle.
We must call one.
Better that the old man dies because of a doctor than because of a lack of medicine.
Mr. Civilization said in a loud and dignified voice.
Indeed.
Grandpa H6ng added.
Mr. Civilization sat down and scratched his head pensively as if planning some sort of high-tech assassination.
Moa has a friend who opened a clinic two years ago.
He returned home on the same ship with moa.
I hear that many people have died under his care.
One patient who came to him with a small pimple on his chin died after he treated it with Chinese herbs.
asked Mrs. Civilization.
Mr. Civilization nodded.
Who is he, again?
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer asked with sudden interest.
Grandpa H6ng ignored the question.
We only need an unscrupulous doctor-someone who neglects his patients or perhaps…overmedicates them.
put in Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
Maybe the answer is to call a pediatrician.
Or we could get an optometrist for his stomach aches or a V.D.
She paused for a moment.
Grandpa H6ng frowned.
Mrs. Civilization began respectfully.
We must be very careful here.
At that moment Red-Haired Xuan timidly entered the room.
He was barely acknowledged and sat down beside a large mirror, where he could stare admiringly at his European-style suit.
He had bought it with the five piasters given him by the senior postal clerk.
he thought merrily to himself.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer turned to Grandpa H6ng.
responded Grandpa Hbng.
hines all day and night!
At that Red-Haired Xuan entered the conversation.
he asked.
Grandpa H6ng replied.
It sounds like asthma.
Xuan replied, sounding like a real herbalist.
He is doubtless very old.
His stomach aches come from poor blood circulation that prevents him from digesting his food.
It could also derive from too many vapors in the sperm following sexual intercourse.
Of course, sometimes such pain is merely psycho-somatic.
There are also cases in which the pain migrates from the patient's stomach to his spine.
I see.
In that case his intestines probably lack sour fluids.
People short of sour fluids typically hurt when they are full.
Red-Haired Xuan rattled on like a well-oiled diagnostic machine.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer and  listened in stunned silence.
How strange!
How utterly unexpected!
Grandpa H6ng asked respectfully.
Before he could respond, Mr. Civilization cut him off.
This is a friend of mine-a student from the medical school.
How unexpected, indeed!
How could Xuan have guessed the benefit he was to derive from an old part-time job for which he was paid to sit on the hood of a car, made up as Charlot, and bark out advertisements over a loudspeaker for herbal medicine manufactured by the self-proclaimed Cochin-chinese King of Venereal Disease Treatment.
It was from this humble origin that Xuan set off on the road to science, status, and prosperity.
A Living Person's Will A Scientific Debate Love-What Else Are You Waiting For?
Reclining atop an ornate ebony bed encrusted with mother-of- pearl, Grandpa H6ng closed his eyes.
To his right lay an opium tray; to his left, a rickshaw coolie.
Grandma sat at his feet.
The rickshaw coolie wiped off his hooves, readying himself for the heavy responsi-bilities of preparing and serving opium.
Grandma said.
Grandpa H6ng frowned and snapped at his wife for the tenth time that evening.
I know!
I know!
What a pain!
Grandma ignored him.
I know!
I know!
What a pain!
I think we should have a combination of traditional and modern rites.
Let's have a mourning flag, a paper and bamboo house for the ritual offering, a Chinese bugle, a sedan coffin, and several dozen banners with parallel verse.
I know!
I know!
What a pain!
Grandma held her tongue.
After several moments Grandpa could not bear her silence any longer.
The rickshaw puller ignored this all-too-familiar exchange.
Grandma continued to list all the complicated rites she wanted.
And Grandpa continued to retch.
As usual, the complexity of the funeral arrangements and the anxiety over how they would be perceived overwhelmed any sentimental meaning invested in the event.
Out-side in the living room, far from the ornate ebony bed, a small group of guests gathered including friends and relatives of the Civilizations.
Each of them had already ascended the stairs, entered the room where Great-Grandpa lay, lifted the mosquito net, and peeked inside.
Then, with their duty complete, they rushed downstairs to drink tea, smoke, and exchange bits of gossip-all the time contemplating the percentage of the old man's fortune they were due upon his death.
Although the old man was only moderately sick, he was now referred to in the past tense.
By this time Mr. ILL was busy designing several ultramodern mourning outfits.
The journalist was preparing an obituary, a fu-neral notice, and photos for the newspaper.
Mrs. Civilization was imagining how she might look in all-white mourning clothes, a fash-ion opportunity that she had been dreaming of for some time.
Mr. Civilization sat, smoking his Ang-le cigarettes, thinking of the prop-erty he was to inherit when the old man finally bit the dust.
With the help of his lawyer, the old man had prepared a will, which stipu-lated that the profit derived from the several dozen houses that he owned would be split among his children and grandchildren, but only after he died.
He was blissfully unaware that this will had only enhanced a powerful desire among his children and grandchildren for his demise.
In the past he had made his fortune with his bare hands.
He had worked his entire life for his family, and now death had become his final filial obligation.
Young Mr. Tan tinkered busily with several cameras, trying to decide which one to use during the funeral.
Everyone called him Tan the High School Graduate, not because he had graduated from high school but because he had failed the graduation exam on three separate occasions.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was holding her sacred son like a gentle mother.
Mr. Joseph Thie't, a close friend of Mr. Civilization, was contemplating starting up a royalist newspa-per, not for the imperial court in Hue' but for Mr. Leon Oaudet and the Orleans family in France.
He viewed the upcoming funeral as an opportunity to boast about his past exploits.
he began.
It seemed that half of Paris turned out for his funeral, including all the right-wing parties.
But no one listened to him.
They were much too busy listening to Mr. ILL.
The funeral clothes must be made from white Shanghai crepe with a black border.
The collar will be rose shaped-white petals with black trim!
The same goes for the mourning cap!
exclaimed Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
Little Master Blessing was less impressed.
Mrs. Civilization clapped her elegant hands together.
Very good!
Only the homed senior clerk was silent.
There was still no sign of his wife.
His eyes welled up with hatred.
He looked around for Xuan but could not find him either.
he asked Mr. Civilization.
He's getting some medicine.
The discussion turned to the question of which profession and position ought to be printed in the obituary.
As the debate heated up, Miss Snow-Grandpa H'Ong's eighteen-year-old baby daugh-ter-entered the room.
She was beautiful and possessed a frivolous romantic quality that was fashionable for the time.
but I didn't meet either of them.
screamed Grandma from somewhere in the room.
You silly child!
Mr. Civilization added angrily.
interjected Joseph Thie't.
Toi doesn't understand!
Nothing is more important than the pa- tient's belief in the medicine.
Haven't toi heard about the healing powers of positive thinking?
Only faith can cure.
explained Mr. Civilization.
The old man has spoken with Mr. Xuan and appears to respect him deeply.
He has great faith in him.
It seems that Mr. Xuan also believes in the healing powers of the sacred medicine from the Bia Pagoda.
How can moa old man not recover?
t, not aware of his friend's ulterior motives.
Mr. Civilization continued to attack his younger sister.
she protested.
Mr. Civilization ran into the other room, looking for his mother.
he moaned under his breath.
What a pain!
A little medicine is usually all you need to do a patient in.
But too many cooks may spoil the soup!
Grandma, who was still worried about the arrival of the two rival herbalists, offered a suggestion.
I know!
I know!
What a pain!
Grandpa snapped.
Amid all this chaos Red-Haired Xuan entered with a vial of filthy water tucked under his arm and a bundle of strange leaves in his hand.
His eyes fell on the senior clerk, which triggered thoughts of his new European suit, which in turn prompted him to appreciate the importance of always trying to meet one's obligations.
He cleared his throat to draw attention to himself.
But before he could finish the horned clerk gestured for him to hold off.
The guests greeted Xuan like a returning prince.
They gathered around him and asked about his trip to the Bia Pagoda.
Miss Snow and her innocent-looking eyes were especially attentive to Xuan, having heard from her brother that he was a student from the medi-cal college.
As the assembled crowd headed toward the stairs, two elderly herbalists-;-Dr. Spleen and Dr. Lung-entered the front door almost simultaneously.
They were followed by two rickshaw drivers, des-perately trying to collect their fares.
Miss Snow emerged from the crowd and gave them each several bills.
Grandpa H6ng began shep-herding the rest of the crowd upstairs.
At that moment there were only two people tending to Great-Grandpa:
Mr. Two and his daughter Miss Moon.
Although Mr. Two was Grandpa H6ng's younger brother, he lived in the countryside and, as a result, garnered little respect within the family.
To him it seemed that his elder brother, his nephew, and his niece by marriage were aliens from another world.
He never expressed this thought publicly, however, because he feared that it would reveal him to be an old-fashioned country bumpkin.
Whenever Miss Moon returned home from her periodic trips to the city, Mr. Two dared not criticize the affectations of speech and behavior that she had picked up from the progressive, civilizing movement then raging throughout the country.
Upon receiving the news that Great-Grandpa was ill, he rushed to his bedside in the city, where he remained day and night.
He helped his father sit up and lie down, emptied his spittoon, and spoon-fed him porridge.
He did not begrudge his older brother, Grandpa H6ng, for lying in bed and smoking opium all day or his nephews and nieces for ignoring the old man.
In his mind their neglect of his father, simply afforded enhanced opportunities for him to fulfill his own filial duty.
The crowd shuffled upstairs into the room and assembled quietly around the bed.
Mr. Civilization made room for Dr. Spleen and Dr. Lung beside the patient and brought over the pile of leaves and the vial of dirty water.
Behold the sacred medicine from the Bia Pagoda.
Dr. Spleen examined the leaves.
Daisies and purslane!?
Dr. Lung held the vial of water up to the light.
What the hell is this?
Mr. Civilization looked over at Red-Haired Xuan.
Xuan responded immediately.
But, in this case, it's a powerful sacred medicine.
I have consulted the yin-yang coins; they have suggested this treatment.
Dr. Spleen said bitterly.
I pre-scribed and administered three doses already.
Dr. Spleen snatched the vial of dirty water from the hands of Dr. Lung.
he snapped.
This is not pond water!
It's simply water from a rice field!
If he drinks this water, he will be beyond recovery!
protested Dr. Lung.
How dare you?
But Dr. Spleen ignored his mistake.
So what if it's not your prescription?
You identified it as pond water when it is clearly field water.
Dr. Lung pouted.
The famous herbalists stood face-to-face, their tempers simmering to a boil.
I don't see why you are so damned arrogant!
Oh!
Please!
Provincial Governor Vi was over sixty when he died!
You can't hold me responsible for what happened to him!
But what about the case of that little girl…Ch~t…the daughter of Mr. Vinh?
Dr. Lung stretched out his open palms defensively.
Who told you that?
Who said she had taken only two doses?
Was it my fault that she ate those plums when she had a fever?
She would have been fine, otherwise!
Two doses?
Who was the bastard that pre-scribed that shoddy, two-bit stomach medicine for Dq.i the clerk?
He almost died because of that!
What kind of herbalist would do that?
They should throw you in jail for that one!
But Dr. Spleen did not flinch.
Charlatan?
Dr. Lung's eyes bulged out like two stuffed snails.
How dare you!?
Go ahead!
Say something else!
I'm not afraid of you!
I'll say whatever I want!
I'll say it to the French Security Police if I please!
Don't you threaten me!
I'll tell them about the time that you mas-saged the eyeball of one of your patients so much that it popped right out!
You're the bastard responsible for that one!
Can I help it if he was going blind?
How about the time you tried to fix that little boy's astluna with that bogus ear-wood fungus?
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer stopped giggling and ran shame-faced out of the room.
You are truly cruel!
How about when Miss Moon here had that problem with smelly armpits?
Six months?
Miss Moon and Miss Snow stiffened abruptly, stopped their titter-ing, and, red-faced, exited the room together.
Mr. Civilization grabbed Dr. Spleen and dragged him down the stairs.
Mr. Two hustled Dr. Lung out into the hall.
Grandpa H6ng began his usual whining.
I know!
I know!
What a pain!
The others were either laughing hysterically or commiserating with Grandma about the doctor's public announcement of her daughter's mangy itch.
The fight between the famous herbalists roused the eighty-year-old Great-Grandpa from his sleep.
He awoke feeling fit and healthy.
he asked.
After expelling the famous herbalists from the house, Mr. Civiliza-tion returned and sat down beside the bed.
I'm recovered?
I'm not dead?
What?
You've taken half of it already, Great-Grandpa.
Mr. Civilization winked at Xuan.
I consulted the yin-yang coins…They foretold that Heaven would help the doctor that consulted its powers.
the old man asked eagerly.
Red-Haired Xuan handed over the field water and several daisy leaves.
They say that the sacred medicine must come from a pond.
It will only work if it is extremely dirty and stinky.
Don't try to trick me.
The old man swallowed a few leaves and downed several cap-fulls of field water.
Sacred medicine, indeed!
A half-hour later the old man had begun to regain his strength.
He sat up and ate half a bowl of porridge.
After everyone had gone home or fallen asleep, Red-Haired Xuan and Miss Snow remained in the patient's room.
Even Mr. Two was asleep on the sofa, content in the knowledge that the old man was on the road to recovery.
For Miss Snow fulfilling her duty toward Great-Grandpa was little more than an excuse to stay up alone with Red-Haired Xuan.
The two did not speak but exchanged a series of knowing glances.
The patient slept quietly.
He did not cough, spit up, or moan.
The moon shone brightly through the glass window.
Finally, Miss Snow boldly broke the silence.
Excuse me, Sir.
That herbalist doctor lied.
Red-Haired Xuan was too embarrassed to respond, and another awkward silence ensued.
Miss Snow thought to her-self, and, overcome with bitterness, she returned to her room.
Victory for the Common People in the Europeanization Shop A Financial Plot A Love Plot In only two weeks the Popular Movement had achieved a stunning victory.
Two weeks before, fate had inserted Red-Haired Xtian into the bourgeois family of Mr. Civilization.
With each passing day, his prestige and influence grew.
Almost effortlessly and without being truly aware of it, he was gradually becoming an important player in society.
His stupidity was mistaken for a combination of courtesy and modesty, and it made him wildly popular.
Now it was merely a waiting game; a simple matter of time before he was catapulted to the top.
Whenever the fortune-teller came over to praise Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer's fidelity to her late husbands and confirm that her son (No way!) was indeed a gift sent directly from Heaven, he always made a point to predict a prosperous and exalted future for Red-Haired Xuan.
In turn, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer boasted of Xuan's education and refinement to the horned senior clerk.
The horned senior clerk pointed out repeatedly Xuan's youthful promise to Grandpa H6ng (I know!
What a pain!
Shut up, already).
Grandpa H6ng reiterated approvingly to Grandma and Great-Grandpa that Xuan was a student from the medical college.
And, of course, every- one repeated eagerly what they had heard from everyone else.
To reap all of these unexpected accolades, Red-Haired Xuan had to do little more than occasionally praise the prowess of the fortune-teller.
The truth, it seems, was known only to the Civilizations, but they dared not disclose it for fear that it might reflect badly on them.
How could they admit that Xuan was originally from a lower-class family, that he had worked as a ball boy at the tennis courts, and that he was fired from this lowly post for lewd and immoral behavior?
What would such a revelation mean for the Europeanization Tailor Shop?
What about Red-Haired Xuan's popularity among female customers who had come to admire his silver tongue, quick wit, and good humor?
Such thoughts consumed Mrs. Civilization.
Her husband, on the other hand, was preoccupied by the fact that he had lied to his status-conscious father about Red-Haired Xuan's credentials as a student from the medical college.
Hence, although he resented Xuan for saving his grandfather with the sacred medicine from the Bia Pagoda-an unforgivable sin-he held his tongue about Xuan's real background.
As for Grandpa H6ng (I know!
What a pain!), despite his surprise and disappointment that the leaves and dirty water had actually cured his father, he dared not reveal his true bitterness toward Xuan.
After all, his son kept reminding him that Xuan was a student from the medical college and his son-in-law-the horned senior clerk-lauded Xuan as someone who deserved respect for his high education and youthful promise.
Hence, Xuan's fortunes continued to rise.
by Grandma, Mr. Two, Miss Moon, Miss Snow, or Joseph Thie't, he simply smiled and kept silent.
When Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer leered at him lustfully, he remained stoic and indifferent.
Following Great-Grandpa's complete recovery, Grandma invited Xuan to a formal banquet in his honor.
This ushered in a new era of freedom and equality in which Xuan became a habitual guest at par-ties held by Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer and the Civilizations.
Soon it was considered an honor to have Xuan as a dinner guest.
Many people admired and respected him.
Others envied and hated him, but this mattered little.
There were also those, more signifi-cantly, who loved and desired him.
After prolonged exposure to this bizarre atmosphere of respect, fear, and flattery, Red-Haired Xuan began to put on airs.
As is often the case in a society in which modesty is disdained, the more snobbish Xuan became, the more respect he enjoyed.
Even his silence was interpreted, by the tailors and seam-stresses, as a sign of authority.
Miss Snow worshiped him because Grandma worshiped him.
It was rumored, in fact, that Grandpa H6ng (I know!
What a pain!) was arranging secretly for Me Su Xuan to marry his precious daughter, Miss Snow.
t, Dr. Straight Talk, even High School Graduate Tan (Mr. Civilization's younger brother).
Because everyone was either being fooled or trying to fool each other, they were all compelled to fear and respect Xuan.
What a great victory for the common people!
At two that afternoon Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer arrived by car at the tailor shop.
She hoped to induce Xuan to accompany her to La journee des cavalieres Hanoiennes, a festival at West Lake.
It was to be a grand affair, presided over by important figures in the political arena.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was surprised to find Xuan minding the shop by himself.
she said respectfully.
Xuan replied breezily.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was silent for a moment.
he replied curtly.
Oh, Mr. Xuan!
Mr. Xuan!
he replied tersely.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was surprised at the unusually abrupt way he spoke to her.
She imagined that there must be a reason for his curtness that she had not yet fully grasped.
Why else would he adopt such an insolent tone with her?
Feeling somewhat awkward, she inquired again about the day's plans.
The seamstresses have left for the festival dressed in the mourn- ing outfits that Mr. ILL designed for Great-Grandpa's funeral.
The clothes were never worn, you may recall, because I saved Great-Grandpa's life…The seamstresses will exhibit the clothes like a squad of living mannequins.
We need to liing-xe this new clothing line, after all.
Red-Haired Xuan continued to respond in a casual and haughty tone.
As he spoke, he fondled a large pair of rubber falsies that had been sent from France as a contribution to the Europeanization Movement of the Great Kingdom of Vi~t.
This beautification instru-ment had arrived several days before in a pretty box, covered by a half-dozen layers of shiny wrapping paper.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer looked on lustily as Xuan handled the dirty item.
She noticed now that they were all alone in the big tailor shop, a rare opportu-nity indeed.
Heartbro-ken, she shook hands with Xuan and left the shop.
Xuan smiled to himself.
He knew that Mrs. Deputy Customs Offi-cer, although old, was even naughtier than an innocent young girl.
A quick nod from him is all it would take!
But she was so old…what would be the point?
Unless, of course, there was some money in it!
He recalled that the talented fortune-teller had predicted that he would be lucky in love this year.
He thought of the money to be made if only he were to propose some sort of monetary arrangement with Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
But he decided to bide his time.
Inadvertently, Xuan had just discovered a principle that most phi-losophers only recognize after their hair turns white:
the value of playing hard to get.
Xuan's cheerful reflections were interrupted by the arrival of the horned senior clerk.
He staggered forlornly into the shop and ex-tended his hand to Xuan in silence.
Xuan announced, shaking his hand vigorously.
Very good!
The horned senior clerk's gratitude appeared extremely heartfelt, as if this were the first time someone had dared to inform him of the devastating news of his wife's affair.
But, in fact, he felt nothing.
Moments later, however, he pulled up a chair and began to com-plain.
That loud and dignified voice is good.
But next time I want you to say it when you see me together with my wife.
Xuan said anxiously.
The senior clerk sprang to his feet.
God, no!
I will die first!
he screamed.
Xuan replied desperately.
But the senior clerk was too worked up to explain.
No!
Don't do this to me!
You promised!
It's not right to break a promise.
repeated Xuan in a worried voice.
But, of course!
You must be aware of the myriad reasons why Mr. ILL is jealous of you.
One is that he blames you for spoiling his wife.
Another is that you are better at waiting on customers than he is.
Your skill at taking measurements for custom-made clothes is clearly superior.
He fears that you are usurping his power.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer seems annoyed with you as well, although I haven't yet figured out why.
Not only do the Civilizations despise you secretly, but they seem to consider you a mortal enemy.
And do you know why?
It is because you saved Great-Grandpa's life, on the one hand, and made Miss Snow cancel an arranged marriage, on the other.
I would be careful if I were you!
As a close friend, it is my duty to warn you of these matters…In return, you must honor your obligation to me.
You must do what I say.
Hate me?
Only Grandma appreciated that.
But she is powerless.
Yes, indeed!
You will see.
Xuan hesitated for a moment.
Then he shook his head.
I just can't!
It's murder!
I'm not a murderer!
A criminal!
Think of it this way.
If you help to kill this one person, it will make many persons extremely happy.
That makes it worthwhile.
Red-Haired Xuan extended his hand to the horned senior clerk.
The senior clerk grasped Xuan's hand tightly and eagerly.
I must go to work.
As soon as he left, the door swung open again, and a beautiful woman rushed in.
At first Xuan thought that it might be a fashion-able young lady looking to get something tailor-made, but it turned out to be only Miss Snow.
she asked breathlessly.
Xuan responded.
Thank goodness!
They have.
I don't want to go!
There will be many singing girls and dancing girls there.
They dress as fashionably as I, sometimes even more so.
I'm from a respectable family.
Of course, that doesn't mean that I don't know how to dance.
I do!
Can you dance, Mr. Xuan?
Xuan was frightened.
Another time perhaps…There is no music here.
A dancing hall?
Really?
You promise?
You misunderstand me, Miss!
Please don't think of me as snob-bish.
Just because I don't say very much, it doesn't mean that I am being disrespectful.
How could I not respect you, Miss?
Xuan's subtle come-on, his first attempt ever with Miss Snow, impressed her deeply.
To conceal her emotions, she pointed inquisitively toward the pile of rubber breasts.
Really!
I must tell my girlfriends.
I have many modem ones, you know.
Xuan responded suggestively.
Miss Snow thrust her chest forward.
You think so?
Do you think they are pert enough?
They are rather unusual for a modern girl.
As further confirmation that she was, in fact, civilized and mod-ern, Miss Snow stepped boldly toward Xuan.
Red-Haired Xuan put his hands mischievously behind his back.
How can one tell what is real these days?
Everything is so artifi-cial!
Love is artificial!
Modernity is artificial!
Even conservatism is artificia 1!
said Miss Snow angrily.
Xuan looked around the empty store and peered out the window.
Then he cupped Miss Snow's breasts in his hands, trying to deter-mine their authenticity.
When he was satisfied that they were, in fact, the genuine article, he kissed her gently on the hand.
Miss Snow was very moved and sighed deeply.
she said softly.
I do not want to marry my fiance.
I know that he will sprout horns if I am forced to marry him.
He is nothing like you!
He is from the countryside, and I fear that he will not know how to love me in a civilized way.
Perhaps…perhaps you can pretend that you are courting me…If we pretend that we are romantically involved, my fiance will be forced to leave me.
Understand?
We will only pretend!
If you promise not to give me horns in the future, I would be willing to do more than just pretend to dishonor you.
Doctor!
Oh, thank you!
I love you so much!
But you must ask for some time off.
For the rest of the afternoon they continued the discussion-Xuan, man of the common people, and Miss Snow, the modern woman.
To the west of Hanoi lies a lake, recently divided into two smaller lakes separated by a single road known as Old Fish Road.
The road is famous throughout the country-all twenty million of our compa-triots know of it-because it is here that girls from good and not-so- good families go out with young male college students, law stu-dents, and students without institutional affiliation.
They come to this road night after night to flirt with each other and to transgress the rules of each other's families.
After several months they invari-ably jump together into one of the lakes.
Initially, most people jumped into West Lake, but, because it was very deep, few of those who attempted suicide survived.
Hence, people eventually shifted to the more shallow and less dangerous White Bamboo Lake.
Night after night idle rickshaw pullers and jobless young men who could swim loitered around the banks of the lake.
whereupon they would dive into the waters and fish out a beauti-ful girl.
Next stop was the Hang D~u Police Station, where they would receive a monetary award, pose for newspaper photos, and sit through numerous noisy interviews.
As a result, White Bamboo Lake became an important setting for those awful tragedies staged regularly in Hanoi during which the evil Vietnamese family con-spires to prevent free marriage, free divorce, free remarriage, and so on.
The White Bamboo Lake might have remained forever and ever little more than a contemporary barometer of tragic conflict between the Old and the New, the Individual and the Family, Self-Sacrifice and Political Awakening, and Oppression and Liberation, had not a great patriot decided to construct on its banks an irresistible (even to the French) lakeside inn known as the Fairyland Hotel.
On the day the hotel opened, the Protectorate attempted to purify and exorcize the atmosphere surrounding the lake by ordering schoolgirls to prac-tice a special dance in which they performed as fairies who descend to earth and release the souls of those who had actually died during their suicide attempts.
As a result, the Fairyland Hotel became as well known as Old Fish Road and White Bamboo Lake.
All self-respecting Vietnamese felt obliged to stay at the hotel at least once, in order to avoid being chided by fashionable intellectuals for forsaking their roots or losing their country to foreigners.
Given the liberationist ideology of Miss Snow, it is no surprise that she saw the hotel as the perfect site to be dishonored.
For Xuan it was as good a place as any to fulfill his solemn obligation of defiling the virginity of a respectable girl.
They entered the hotel through the Japanese-style concrete gate.
Miss Snow said to Xuan.
We will eat together, drink together, and dance together!
We will play Ping-Pong and go boating together.
Xuan racked his brain for a flowery reply, but he could only come up with a sentence that Mr. ILL used frequently with female custom-ers in the tailor shop.
Xuan's flat delivery and straight face made Miss Snow think he was making a joke.
She burst out laughing in a way common among fashionable women.
Oh, my goodness!
They sauntered leisurely through the hotel flower garden, as natu-ral as any pair of secret lovers.
Miss Snow whispered to Xuan.
The Fairyland Hotel was, indeed, a magnificent castle.
For Viet-namese who had money to burn it possessed anything and every-thing that might possibly bring happiness.
A team of architects had employed all of their creative energy to erect an extraordinary build-ing overhanging the lake.
Its numerous balconies were constructed so that guests might be able to watch each other boating and swim-ming.
Its huge garden contained a tennis court, Ping-Pong tables, and a swimming pool.
There was a dancehall and a wireless radio room.
The restaurant specialized in French and Chinese cuisine and served all manner of rare and expensive delicacies.
For those who could afford the bill, a night in the hotel offered all the pleasures of modern life presented in an atmosphere as refined as the old impe-rial capital.
If the Fairyland Hotel did not exist, how could the Viet-namese hold up their heads among foreigners?
The hotel provided a perfect place for the idle bourgeois to come together and forget their ennui.
It contained sixty rooms and dozens of young female love peddlers (also known as top-grade quality hens), following a system innovated in more civilized countries.
When Xuan and Miss Snow arriyed at eight o'clock Sunday morn-ing, the hotel was relatively empty.
There were a few people on the tennis courts and several others playing Ping-Pong.
Half a dozen elegantly dressed men and women sat drinking on a balcony looking out over the lake.
Three glamorous hotel hens, dressed as upper-class girls, lolled about looking for men with whom to go swimming.
Everyone was chatting merrily.
A modern-looking girl extended her hand to Xuan and Miss Snow and started introducing them to the other guests.
Allow me to introduce Mr. Xuan, the manager of the Europeanization Tailor Shop, a skillful measurer of women, and a designer who has created many beautiful and fashionable outfits.
a young man said, respect-fully.
At that moment the hotel owner appeared, all dressed up as if for a big party.
Red-Haired Xuan blanched and looked around for a place to hide.
Miss Snow stepped forward to introduce them.
Victor Ban bowed his head low and shook hands with Xuan, who stood frozen in place like a wooden statue.
Just like Xuan, Victor Ban had also recently reinvented himself-from the King of Venereal Disease Treatment to the owner of the Fairyland Hotel.
But Xuan's transformation-he was now a doctor-was quite unbelievable!
After a stint as an unsuccessful horse jockey, Mr. Victor Ban real-ized that the tides of civilization sweeping over our country were to be accompanied by waves of venereal disease.
He decided to change his job.
Mixing cat jelly with eucalyptus oil and little bits of clay, he fashioned a relatively effective treatment for the affliction.
As with other self-respecting Kings of Venereal Disease Treatment, his cures rarely lasted as long as advertised.
But, nevertheless, within two years he had become a millionaire.
Flush with capital, he quickly built a large brothel outside of the city center and hired ten prosti-tutes.
Every time a young, healthy man began frequenting his brothel, they would eventually be directed by one of the working girls to the clinic of Victor Ban.
Temporarily cured, they would visit the brothel again, creating a sort of continuous shuttle service be-tween the brothel and the clinic.
Victor Ban grew richer and richer.
His agents worked in all three regions of the country.
His cars can-vassed every street, broadcasting incessantly over loudspeakers on the unchecked spread of nocturnal emissions, wet dreams, chilly semen, painful vaginal discharge, syphilis, and gonorrhea.
In addi-tion, he treated perforated lungs, ripped intestines, heart illnesses, eye problems, and various ear ailments.
His jingles were so perva-sive and persuasive that healthy people feared for their lives, pur-chased his medicines, and sung his praises as a patriot and a great humanitarian.
Among our twenty million compatriots, Victor Ban had become a household name…Soon thereafter, he plotted to create a place of refuge-a fairyland-within this venereal disease-infested land so that the people might forget their painful and stink-ing sores.
Hence, he opened the Fairyland Hotel.
It was only a few years ago that he had paid a bastard and vaga-bond-now Dr. Xuan-twenty cents per day to sit on the hood of his cars and scream into the loudspeaker:
It was almost beyond belief!
This same Xuan was now the boyfriend of Grandpa H6ng's youngest daughter, Miss Snow, and a respected doctor.
Xuan and Victor Ban stood staring at each other.
Luckily for Xuan, they were interrupted by one of the modern girls.
Miss Snow replied.
It is so good that Xuan has quit medical school.
They teach nothing of value there anyway!
It's a waste of time.
During the conversation a young man had been staring at Xuan's red hair.
Which kind of dye you use in your hair, Sir?
It's beautiful.
Very fashionable!
Xuan replied.
said the girl, chiding the man and flattering Miss Snow simultaneously.
Mr. Xuan's job is to promote the latest fash-ions and most elegant styles.
Beautiful hair is just part of the whole package.
Mr. Victor Ban turned to Miss Snow.
She elbowed Xuan in the side.
What do you think, boyfriend?
Just one day?
Xuan tried to calculate how long it might take to defile the honor of a respectable girl.
Victor Ban excused himself.
Another elegantly dressed young man approached the group and addressed Xuan.
he said.
Xuan agreed, and everybody moved to the tennis court.
It took less than an hour for Red-Haired Xuan to defeat the young man.
The crowd applauded, and Miss Snow beamed with pride.
Xuan's easy victory, shameless showboating, and fancy racket and footwork gave him the glamorous aura of the privileged son of a famous Mandarin or a provincial governor.
Victor Ban returned to investi-gate the commotion.
Seeing the crowd go wild for the victor, he decided that this Xuan could not be the same Xuan who had once worked for him.
After the game the loser congratulated Xuan and expressed his desire for a rematch at a later date.
Overcome with pride, Miss Snow thought to herself that Xuan clearly deserved not only to be her boyfriend but to ruin her reputation as well.
Hence, back in their room she was taken aback when he plopped down on the bed, utterly exhausted.
She took a seat on the arm of a chair and sadly contemplated his impolite behavior.
Suddenly, she heard the sound of a female voice singing from the adjacent room.
Ze…da…da…mua.
Mong pe' y ~ Pa ri!
.
Xuan called out, oblivious to the singing.
Be quiet!
My goodness…it's…it's…my sister!
Xuan cried out.
Who's that?
No!
Keep your voice down!
Really?
Miss Snow asked in aston-ishment.
How?
Xuan replied cleverly.
At that moment Mrs. Sunset, the wife of the horned senior clerk, and her lover were having an intimate conversation, unaware that Xuan and Snow were eavesdropping in the next room.
we can't go on like this forever.
Mrs. Sunset asked angrily.
But…I want you as a lover not a husband!
Would you really want to be my husband?
Then you would have horns, too!
Damn!
What's so bizarre about it?
Men may not understand it, but that's the way all women think today!
To have only a husband and no lover is cowardly!
Where is the virtue in that, the beauty, the intelli-gence?
Not even a ghost would desire a woman like that!
If I had no lover, my friends would scorn me!
How could I show my face in public?
I would barely be considered a real woman at all!
A water buffalo is only a true water buffalo when it eats and fights.
I am faithful to both of you!
My husband and my lover!
Never!
He was born with horns.
Believe me, he'll never know.
If the owl knew that he stank, then he would not stink anymore!…'Ze da da mua!
She sang the rest of the song.
Xuan whispered to Miss Snow.
How worthy!
Xuan's praise for her older sister made Miss Snow jealous.
Xuan kissed Miss Snow passionately on the mouth.
he said in a sultry voice.
Miss Snow said, holding her head high.
My sister and I must be exactly alike in all things.
Xuan hurriedly placed his hands on Miss Snow's breasts.
This time, however, she pushed them away.
You have done that already.
But after Red-Haired Xuan offered a broad variety of suggestive comments, Miss Snow relaxed her resistance and remained silent, thus confirming the profound uncanniness of the fairer sex.
They joked back and forth and eventually began uttering virtuous and deep-felt sentiments to each other.
Finally, Red-Haired Xuan brought up the ultimate favor.
Quiet!
Miss Snow stood up angrily.
I will never give you the ultimate favor!
You are not a polite man!
I am not as foolish as many innocent girls!
Red-Haired Xuan was astounded.
she continued.
Half of your virginity?
Miss Snow replied haughtily.
How can I let my virginity be completely lost!
From then on Xuan was proper and well behaved.
He understood that Miss Snow was a semi-virgin, an unusual kind of woman that our land of Nam can be proud to have produced here in the twenti-eth century.
Red-Haired Xuan the Poet A Fight Over Horns The Conservatism of Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer After eating an elegant French meal in the dining room like the other upper-crust Vietnamese guests, Miss Snow suggested a walk in the Fairyland Hotel's garden.
Fearing another encounter with Victor Ban, Xuan cited exhaustion and politely declined.
Miss Snow pouted.
You don't go to the Fairyland Hotel to be exhausted.
You go to have fun!
This is an era of science, physical fitness, and sports.
How can you be exhausted?
You are a healthy young man, a doctor no less!
Are you telling the truth?
I thought you loved women desperately like the French!
Her ideas impressed Xuan, and he struggled for a response.
He turned to leave, but Miss Snow stopped him.
She began counting out loud to herself on her fingers.
One fe-male friend, two male friends, Victor Ban-that's four people!
There are now at least four people, my dear, who must suspect that I'm a bad girl.
Isn't it wonderful?
It will only be a matter of days until rumors reach my parents and that bastard of a fiance.
Xuan said.
Miss Snow replied, laughing.
Your way of speaking is so characteristically twentieth century.
But there's no need to worry.
She paused for a moment.
You have never mentioned your par-ents before.
Xuan answered sadly.
Miss Snow's eyes lit up.
That makes you an even better catch!
If I marry you, I won't have a mother-in-law!
What happiness!
Xuan did not know how to respond.
she continued.
I'm not as reek.Jess as other girls.
Xuan replied impishly.
she said firmly.
Her sharp response pleased Red-Haired Xuan and gave him hope that, if he were to marry Miss Snow in the future, he need not worry about sprouting horns.
Arm in arm, they walked outside together and into a garden that was as lush and colorful as a real fairyland.
Lilies and snapdragons bloomed in the flower beds, and withered petals lay helter-skelter along the pebbled path.
After several minutes they noticed that they were being followed by a short young man with glassy eyes, an emaciated body, and the gaunt face of a poet.
He wore a European-style suit, and his pants were cuffed in the so-called elephant style.
He stared anxiously at Miss Snow.
''Here!
she whispered to Xuan.
Xuan's face reddened with jealousy, and he turned around to look.
Focusing intently on the object of his desire, the young man did not notice Xuan and continued to walk toward Miss Snow in his elephant cuffs.
Miss Snow said in a low voice.
He is just a poet!
Miss Snow grinned merrily as young girls often do when they are being pursued.
She began hopping and skipping between the with-ered flowers along the pebbled path.
The poet followed her.
Just as Xuan was about to scold him for being impolite and presumptuous, the young man stopped and recited a poem aloud.
The fairy's feet were light as air.
Ashamed, young buds fell everywhere.
Beauty envies rival beauty.
She tramples flowers underfoot-alas.
Miss Snow giggled appreciatively, and Xuan's hatred gave way to a begrudging respect.
Like poets everywhere, the young man did not flinch in the face of life's bitterness.
Instead, he put on a brave face and recited another poem.
If not a bud beneath her feet, My heart is sad, my gloom complete.
I pick a wilted flower up To press against my throbbing heart!…The poet stopped and bent down.
He picked up a flower and pressed it tightly against his heart as if embracing an imaginary lover.
No longer hearing the patter of footsteps behind her, Miss Snow glanced back over her shoulder.
There she saw the poet hug-ging the flower with both arms.
she said.
That man has been following me for months.
asked Xuan between clenched teeth.
A number of literary possibilities ran through Xuan's mind.
He felt compelled to compose a brief poem to compete with his new rival.
How hard could it be?
He recalled numerous jingles that he had recited flawlessly by heart in the past, back when he chanted advertisements over a loudspeaker for Victor Ban.
Miss Snow clapped her hands with joy.
she squealed.
Placing his hands behind his back, Red-Haired Xuan approached the poet and began to versify in a loud and dignified voice:
No matter if you're young or old, Avoid the sun, the wind, the cold.
Beware fevers, headaches, and the flu; dry skin and heat rash make you blue.
Day and night you'll rant and rave.
Your feet won't walk, your hands won't wave.
For you I have these words to say:
Buy our ointment, don't delay.
Red-Haired Xuan wanted to continue, but the young man put up his hands to signal surrender.
he stammered.
Your humble student has learned his lesson…Your talent is truly great!
Shamefaced, the poet bowed low to Xuan.
Then he turned and scurried off.
My goodness!
What a talented man you are!
Your poem was as scathingly satirical as Tu M&'s.
Stumped by the question, Xuan responded cleverly with one of his own.
Miss Snow then answered for herself:
Of course!
You were a student at the medical college!
That's why your poetry is so scien-tific.
Right?
Xuan and Miss Snow strolled merrily over to the swimming pool.
Suddenly, Miss Snow blanched.
Damn!
It's the senior clerk!
She ducked behind a tree and disappeared.
Red-Haired Xuan spied the horned senior clerk walking together with a young woman.
His beard was neatly trimmed, and he was dressed in an unusually elegant way.
In spite of his horns, he looked uncharacteristically content, almost happy.
His companion dressed in a style that was partially modem and partially old-fashioned.
She looked like someone who embraced both the bad manners of a liber-ated woman and the old virtues of a traditional one.
It was difficult to tell, in fact, which kind of woman she was!
Red-Haired Xuan was unsure if the woman was the senior clerk's wife.
If not, then life was even more complicated than he had imag-ined.
In any case Xuan quickly recalled his obligation to the senior clerk.
After gesturing for the couple's attention, he bowed low, straightened himself up, and stuck out his chest.
he announced in the booming voice of a human loudspeaker.
The senior clerk turned pale.
he stammered.
Xuan replied stupidly.
What a lucky coincidence!
At this minute your wife is here in the hotel with her boyfriend.
The senior clerk turned even paler.
he screamed hoarsely.
Xuan replied.
Damn it!
Take me to her now!
Please!
Red-Haired Xuan immediately started to lead the way, eager to witness a love affair.
Xuan stopped in front of the room and glanced at the homed senior clerk.
The homed senior clerk took a deep breath and knocked at the door.
After fifteen minutes the door cracked open.
A high-pitched scream echoed from within the room.
My God!
That bitch!
the senior clerk scowled.
Red-Haired Xuan and the other woman stood by apprehensively.
The hotel guests were busy swimming, diving, and bathing in the lake, oblivious to the tragic predicament of the senior clerk.
His wife's lover came to the door, fully dressed.
he said gently.
replied the senior clerk, fuming with anger.
His wife's lover bowed his head respectfully.
His plan was to outmaneuver the senior clerk by demonstrating superior social skills.
I am honored to make your acquaintance, Sir.
Please try to keep in mind our exalted social positions.
The gambit seemed to produce the desired effect on the senior clerk.
Yes, of course.
I am glad you are being so sensible.
I trust you will continue to maintain your level-headedness.
After all, this is certainly not your first pair of horns.
There is no reason to get angry.
It will only make people laugh at us both.
Ever conscious of their social reputations, the two men continued to address each other in extremely respectful tones.
Eventually, how-ever, the senior clerk began to break down.
Sir, although my wife has put her clothes back on, I remain some-what concerned.
' His wife's lover was impressed by the intellectual power of the senior clerk's reasoning.
Sensing the impossibility of denying his adulterous crime, he tried a different approach.
Sir, sprouting horns is not so bad.
It is merely a question of bad luck, like an unintended accident.
Take Napoleon, for example.
Not only did he win great victories in the North and the East, but he was extremely handsome.
The comparison to Napoleon eased the mind of the horned senior clerk.
But he continued to protest.
Whether it's my fault or not, there is no profit in sprouting horns.
How do you plan to compen-sate me for the damage that you have inflicted?
The idea of police or media involvement frightened the lover.
He racked his brain for another solution.
Oh!
Oh!
asked the senior clerk in disbelief.
It is, indeed!
Your wife told me that she was unmarried and considers me to be a sort of common-law husband.
This is the first time I have heard of your existence.
You have caught us red-handed, that is true.
But, in point of fact, your wife has been enjoying two husbands simultaneously.
Hence, I am also a horned husband.
I too have been damaged.
I don't know what you are talking about!
Xuan bowed his head.
he replied courteously.
the lover added threaten-ingly.
Perhaps I should consult my lawyer about this matter.
As an office clerk, you are no doubt familiar with the law.
Upon hearing the word lawyer, the senior clerk began worrying about the legality of his own presence in the Fairyland Hotel.
He feared that his reputation as a model official might be tarnished.
Perhaps it was he who would be caught red-handed during his attempt to catch his wife and her lover red-handed.
With these thoughts in mind, he winked at his own lover and extended his hand to his wife's.
Farewell, Sir!
Like an escaped convict, he dashed out the front gate of the Fairy-land Hotel, followed by his lover.
Xuan was also struck by the refer-ence to lawyers.
Fearing dire repercussions, he walked swiftly away without looking back.
He quickly came upon Miss Snow.
he said to her.
Frightened and flustered, Miss Snow followed Xuan to the Japa-nese gate.
As they passed through it, the car of Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer pulled up in front of the hotel.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer jumped out of the car and called out the name of Miss Snow.
You are engaged already, my dear.
Miss Snow pointed at Xuan.
We're just friends!
Miss Snow flagged a rickshaw.
She got in and took off down the street, leaving Xuan and Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer behind.
Young girls today are so ill bred.
They do nothing but eat and go out on the town.
A woman's duty is to follow and remain faithful to her husband.
Whatever happened to the three obliga- tions and the four virtues?
Xuan stood there, his mouth shut tightly like a mussel.
And you, Mr. Xuan.
You must behave yourself.
Don't ruin other people's lives.
She is engaged, meaning she is taken already.
' This brief lecture in morality reminded Xuan of his earlier prob-lems.
It also reminded him that Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was, in fact, a widow.
he stammered.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer smiled.
She hopped back into her car and sped off, a fugitive from love.
Red-Haired Xuan bade farewell to the Fairyland Hotel and re-turned to the Europeanization Tailor Shop on foot.
Opening Day at the Tennis Court Red-Haired Xuan:
Master Orator Preparations for a Marriage The opening of Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer's private tennis court was truly a historic event for sports in Vietnam.
As with most open-ing days, this one included a tea party, champagne toasts, and a formal speech.
Present at the party were Mr. ILL and his wife, Miss Snow and her two older siblings (the high school graduate and Mrs. Sunset, the wife of the horned senior clerk), and the royalist politician Joseph Thie't.
Sitting amid the huge crowd, Joseph Thie't imagined that he was a great political leader surrounded by the masses on all sides.
Like a true political leader, Joseph Thie't was deeply concerned about the good of the nation while simultaneously despising the tastes and amusements of the masses.
Ignoring the noisy din of the crowd, he opened a French newspaper and read the agreeable news that a disciple of the royalist Maurras had recently bloodied the face of M.
Leon Blum.
He experienced a momentary sensation that there was no one in the crowd but himself.
The crowd ignored him as well.
Other than little Master Blessing (No way!), everyone who was anyone in high society came out for the event.
The crowd grew more and more tipsy, and the upper crust sank lower and lower.
Mr. Civilization, frail and supremely unathletic, stood up and raised his glass.
Mr. Civilization rattled on for almost an hour.
He spoke about the tradition of sports in ancient Greece, about our own national sport-ing movement, and about the crucial importance of sports for the future of the race.
He recounted the biography of Mrs. Senior Clerk (otherwise known as Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer) and praised her fashionable and progressive vision of building a tennis court to pro-mote the cause of sports within her family.
He went on to sing the praises of female athletes, singling out Miss Junior Walking Race.
who waste all their money build-ing village communal houses, restoring old Buddhist statues and pagodas, or casting bronze temple bells.
He allowed that the traditional practice of spirit possession might be considered a kind of sport, although a rather dated one.
The journalist who advocated progressive reforms for society at large and conservative practices for his own family scribbled down the great man's valuable ideas.
Mr. Civilization then outlined the qualities characteristic of the ideal woman so that Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer could be sure that she was one.
He concluded by introducing Red-Haired Xuan:
an exemplary young man and professor of tennis who had received virtually every honor that someone in his position might possibly acquire.
In short, the speech possessed all the necessary attributes of a formal oratorical address by a great man of letters or an important politician:
embellishment, fabrication, exaggeration, fantasy, and duplicity-all dressed up in the dishonest language of literature.
The crowd applauded enthusiastically.
Upon the conclusion of his speech, Mr. Civilization took his seat in a dignified and falsely modest fashion-as all public announcers tend to do.
His aunt rose to respond.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Offi-cer thanked the announcer and all the ladies and gentlemen who had turned out for the opening day ceremonies of her new tennis court.
She expressed the hope that it would always be so crowded.
Everyone clapped again…Unfamiliar with the rituals of opening day ceremonies and dis-tracted by the attention bestowed upon him, Red-Haired Xuan did not realize that he was expected to respond publicly.
Instead, he nursed a tall glass of champagne and applauded loudly with the rest of the crowd.
Even as members of the crowd began glancing at him expectantly, he folded his arms and remained silent.
His ungrateful attitude provoked murmurs of disapproval from the crowd.
Finally, the wife of the horned senior clerk stood up and addressed him.
Eager for any opportunity to needle Xuan, Mr. ILL urged him on as well.
That is right!
Every honor should rain down upon the tennis professor on this, the opening day of the tennis court!
Please, Sir, put your modesty aside.
chimed in Miss Snow.
Say something clever!
Like a mechanical puppet manipulated by a team of puppet mas-ters, Red-Haired Xuan stood up, still holding his champagne.
A speech?
He had never before been shy about speaking loudly in public, and he never lost his voice, two important qualities for a good orator.
In the past he had always been extremely effective using his voice to conquer, oppress, and move the hearts of the masses-whether selling roasted peanuts, working as an advertis-ing boy at the theater, or making loudspeaker announcements for the Cochinchinese King of Venereal Disease Treatment.
Speaking was not the problem.
The problem was:
what to say…?
He thought deeply for several minutes.
Gradually, his mind re-called the language often used by the Civilizations and Mr. ILL.
He had grown accustomed to this language ever since the day he began shouldering the responsibility of Europeanizing society.
As he began to speak, his mind raced forward searching for what to say next.
Xuan based this unusual opening on something he had overheard at the Fairyland Hotel when he was trying to dishonor the respect-able Miss Snow.
The result was unexpectedly encouraging.
Never before had the members of the audience been addressed by a public orator in such an intimate way.
They listened in rapt attention.
I have played a role in the movement for social reform…Still, I must work very hard and understand exactly what I am doing…We are still not Europeanized enough!…A roadblock on the road of evolution.
Sports…Race…What is family happiness if not the happiness of husbands and their wives?
Recalling the slogans typically shouted out when sports champi-ons were awarded their trophies from high-ranking ministers or governors, Xuan concluded his speech.
Just then, Joseph Thiet read in his newspaper that royalist newspa-pers were calling for the head of the socialist Leon Blum.
Joseph Thiet, originally a member of the Th~p ttJ Lua Party, slapped his thighs and yelled out approvingly:
Bravo!
Following his lead, the crowd broke into thunderous applause.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer issued a loud Lip lip LC!.
Several skep-tics in the crowd applauded as well but only because Red-Haired Xuan had delivered his own extemporaneous speech instead of rely-ing on a prerecorded gramophone announcement, like most real athletes.
A round of champagne toasts followed during which people flat-tered each other like prime ministers at a summit.
Then everyone descended to the tennis court.
A moving sight awaited their arrival.
What a great moment for sports in this country and for the future of women!
On the net of the tennis court, as brand new as a virgin girl, they saw one…two…three…four…panties, slips, underwear, trousers, and pajama bottoms-all made from silk, some embroidered, some made from lace.
The panties, all of which belonged to Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer, were so stylish that even very old men began to get excited!
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was furious and scolded the laun-dry woman.
the old-fashioned laundress com-plained.
The items were removed and the tennis court was restored to its rightful function.
For the first match Xuan played Mrs. Civilization.
Then he went against Dr. Straight Talk.
Finally, he teamed up with Dr. Straight Talk to play against Mrs. Civilization and an old friend of Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer who had married a Frenchman.
Meanwhile, at Grandpa H6ng's house rumors were flying that l.
Hip, hip, hip…Houra 1 Miss Snow had been seen with Mr. Xuan.
When she heard the news, Grandma gritted her teeth like an old-fashioned mother.
Will you never learn?
Spoiling your children like that!
When her belly swells up like a barrel…then you will understand the true mean-ing of Women's Rights, Civilization, Ultra Modernity, and Libera-tion!
To Grandpa, Grandma's conservative theories represented a major obstacle for the women's liberation movement in the country.
He shut his eyes tightly.
I know!
I know!
What a pain!
Ignoring Grandpa's protest, Grandma ordered the opium servant into the kitchen.
As a civilized man and a supporter of women's rights, Grandpa H'Ong did not protest this attack on his servant.
He lay yawning beside his opium tray as Grandma rattled on.
Did you know that Xuan and Snow rented an 8-ten room to-gether?!
I know!
What a pain!
Who would have suspected such behavior from Mr. Xuan?
I know!
What a pain!
Grandma suddenly imagined the things that men and women typically do together in a hotel room.
She burst into tears like an old-fashioned mother.
Hearing Grandma's cries, Grandpa opened his eyes.
Grandma cried even louder.
What else?
What is old-fashioned?
Answer me that!
Nowadays, men and women are not segregated as in the era of our parents!
Nowadays, men and women are free to be friends and to go out together for fun just like French people!
Girls can have boyfriends just as they can have girlfriends.
Luy has assured me that it is.
Your son!
What a show-off!
He opened that naughty tailor shop and now is involved in all kinds of monkey business!
It's disgusting!
I can't bear it anymore!
Who cares if it's disgusting?
I'll tell you something else!
Your daughter-in-law is now wearing shorts in front of me, her own husband's mother!
How do you like that!
How do you know she's pregnant?
Do you know what they did together?
They bathed, they swam, and they danced!
A half-hour had elapsed since the dismissal of the opium servant.
Like a proper opium addict, Grandpa's eyes glazed over, and his nose began to run.
He shut his eyes tightly.
I know!
What a pain!
Everyone knows that the two of them closed the door to their room and took a nap together.
So what?
A look of pain crossed Grandma's face.
How do you know?
Quick!
Call the servant to prepare opium for me!
Enough of this story!
But Grandma did not call the servant.
Ignoring Grandpa's sacred rights as an opium addict, she continued to castigate him.
Do you think we should wait until her belly swells up like a barrel before making a fuss?
Doesn't it bother you that Snow is already engaged?
That bastard Xuan is a no-good, cheating dog!
He's not a real man!
Just you wait!
I will force Civilization and that wife of his to fire him!
I'll talk to Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer as well, that shameless old bitch!
A tennis court?
What a whore!
I know!
What a pain!
Mark my words, I will beat Snow to death!
I will curse that bitch Deputy Customs Officer, you wait and see!…I will send Civiliza-tion's wife back to her mother!
What a pain!
Shut up, already!
Call the servant to prepare my opium!
Grandma slammed her fist down on the table.
I will not call him!
You wait just a minute!
Grandpa sat up.
How dare you?
You wait and see!
I will marry Snow to Xuan.
I promise!
He used to be a student from the medical college, and now people call him doctor!
Who knows, maybe he will win a tennis championship some day!
Our family will be blessed for seventy generations if Snow gets pregnant by Xuan.
Like all opium addicts, Grandpa became short-tempered when he needed a fix.
The Peculiar Language of the Old and the New A Princess Pricked by a Thorn The Irony of Fate The alarm clock rang at eight in the morning.
Mr. Civilization kicked off his blankets and sat up in bed.
His lovable wife was nowhere to be seen.
Glancing at the calendar on the wall, he suddenly remembered that today was Thursday, the day of her tennis lesson.
After washing his face and changing clothes, he buzzed for the servant, who appeared with a tray of milk cakes, butter, coffee, and chocolate-the favorite breakfast of upper-class intellectuals.
He sat down at his wife's dressing table.
As Mr. Civilization wolfed down the food, he combed his hair and began to make up his face.
He painted his fingernails with bright-red nail polish.
Then he applied pancake to his cheeks and covered them with a layer of powder.
After toweling his face clean, he dabbed on another clownish layer of powder.
With his black hair curling down the nape of his long neck, his bulging eyes and Adam's apple, and his milky white face, he looked like a feminine man of lipstick and powder…Suddenly, he heard footsteps out in the hall approaching his room.
The door swung open.
Before he could curse the stupidity of the people of Annam for failing to knock before entering a room, he recognized that this particular Annamese offender was his own mother.
He forced a smile and began wiping off his fashionable face.
Without answering the question, she placed her hands behind her back and peered around the room.
A rolled cigarette dangled from the corner of her lips.
Eventually, she sat down on the bed.
she asked.
he replied nervously.
She shook her head disapprovingly.
Oh!
He sensed what was coming:
another episode in the never-ending conflict that split all families down the middle, the clash between the old and the new.
he replied.
The old woman was furious, but she tried to control herself.
Why aren't you at the shop?
It's late!
You will go bankrupt if you continue to be so lazy!
Civilization continued to powder his face.
Although she did not actually understand his response, she saw no point in pursuing this line of questioning further.
The purpose of her visit, after all, was to raise the delicate question of Red-Haired Xuan.
she asked.
You mean the tennis professor?
Mr. Civilization had been misrepresenting Xuan's background for so long that he had almost come to believe the lies himself.
In a matter of weeks he had succeeded in transforming Xuan from a ball boy into a professor.
Once he had already presented Xuan as a progressive and highly educated medical student, it could never be admitted that he was actually a ball boy from a tennis club.
Grandma asked.
The question surprised him.
I don't even know if she is inter-ested.
I approve, of course.
Tennis is very healthy.
Mr. Xuan seems very proper and well behaved.
he responded, unaware of his mother's machina- tions.
After all, did he not cure Great-Grandpa?
We must be forever grateful to him for that.
No question about it.
She paused for a moment.
What would you think if we were to marry him to Snow?
This question made Mr. Civilization uneasy, and he frowned.
he replied cautiously.
With a grown-up daughter, it is only natural to think about a son-in-law.
It is the duty of parents to make sure that their children get married.
Mr. Civilization shook his head.
she said, feigning disappointment.
he answered, sounding like an old-fashioned moralist.
I am afraid that it would be a shame for us if he refused.
he snapped.
That's not enough!
Grandma stood up, approached her son, and stuck a finger in his face.
There is something else.
Mr. Xuan has slept with your youn-ger sister already!
The old woman was overcome by a fit of dizziness.
She reached unsteadily for the wall.
she moaned.
You let the bee live up your sleeve!
Now everything is so complicated.
You've ruined your little sister's life.
You've sullied the family's honor.
And what about those dirty rumors about him and your wife!
His mother's words struck Civilization like a thunderbolt.
He was overcome by an urge to reject progressivism and return to the comforts of conservatism.
Her reference to his wife inflamed his jealousy.
Nothing frightened him as much as sprouting horns, despite the fact that horns were more a sign of progress than conservatism.
Modern women who were virtuous were not a prob-lem.
Modern women who were not virtuous were also not a prob-lem, especially for men who thought of women as toys…A problem only occurred when those toys were one's own sister and wife…No…It could never happen.
/1 Are you sure about this?
Her older sister, the senior clerk's wife, saw them renting a room in the Fairyland Hotel.
How strange!
Why didn't she try to stop her younger sister?
She said that she feared Snow would hate her and there would be a conflict between sisters.
Mr. Civilization thought for a while.
Let me check out the story to make sure that it is true.
Then we will figure out what to do.
Don't worry, Mother.
Whatever's happened has happened.
Mr. Civilization sprayed perfume on his hair, grabbed his velvet hat, and raced down the stairs.
Then he took off in search of Red-Haired Xuan.
The tennis court was empty except for Mrs. Civilization and Red-Haired Xuan.
Miss Jannette, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer's daugh-ter, was home from school visiting her mother.
She was seated courtside, with an open book between her knees.
Her attention drifted back and forth from the action on the court to the pictures in her book.
A couple of poorly dressed ten-year-old ball boys ran back and forth retrieving balls for Red-Haired Xuan, now a very well-dressed professor in Western-style pants, a sleeveless shirt, and a pair of white canvas tennis shoes.
Instead of running around the court in tennis shorts, practicing her backhand, as she had during the previous weeks, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer remained upstairs.
Her practice regimen had been interrupted by another sacred task-the task of a gentle mother.
For some unknown reason, in the last two days little Master Blessing had eaten one less bowl of rice than usual.
He would sit, quiet as a philosopher, for long stretches at a time without disturbing his nanny.
What was happening to this boy blessed by Heaven and Buddha?
The previous afternoon little Master Blessing had sneezed three times.
That evening he got the hiccups after drinking a glass of water.
During the night he wet his bed only once instead of twice as was customary.
Early this morning he had coughed three times.
What a bad omen!
Although she revealed her fears to no one, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer worried that something was terribly wrong.
? Perhaps the Buddha from the Perfume Pagoda had fallen deeply in love with his own offspring-who knew if the Buddha had chil-dren of his own?
Perhaps the Buddha longed to release his child from the misery of earthly existence.
The fortune-teller had predicted that little Master Blessing was to live a long life.
Could he be wrong?
Such questions preoccupied Master Blessing's mother and made her miserable with worry.
If all parents are obsessed with the welfare of their children, imagine the anxiety of a mother with a child sent directly from Heaven.
She had carefully avoided all taboo food and activities thought to bring bad luck and had refrained from offering praise for her son that might draw the attention of evil spirits.
She had made offerings and pledged to dedicate her son to Heaven.
She had carried an incense bowl on her head and chanted verse written in Chinese characters.
She had prayed.
There was nothing that she had not done.
had happened!
She contemplated calling upon the famous monk Brother Tang Phu or consulting with Dr. Straight Talk.
As she stared desperately at little Master Blessing sitting atop a table in the middle of the room, her gaze fixated upon the tennis players through the upstairs window.
While respecting and admiring them, she was struck by their callousness in the face of her son's predicament.
Her anger dissipated quickly, however, after she remembered that she had not yet informed anyone of the news, not even her maids and servants.
She feared that disclosure might, somehow, bring bad luck…What a mess!
At that moment Mr. Civilization pushed open the gate and walked into the yard.
He tipped his hat to Miss Jannette and stopped briefly to chat with her.
Spying his wife over her shoulder, he was struck by the fact that her shorts were too short and revealed too much of her shapely, white legs.
This was especially troubling given her proximity to such a suspicious character as Red-Haired Xuan.
For a moment the very idea of progressive social reform repelled him.
At the very least, he thought, his wife's shorts could do with a little more conservatism.
The sight of Xuan concentrating feverishly on the game, however, eased his mind a little.
Enough!
he shouted.
My dear!
She tapped her racket on the ground three times to signal a time-out and headed toward her husband.
Mr. Civilization said politely to Xuan.
replied Xuan, gasping for breath.
The couple walked leisurely toward the gate.
the husband asked.
His tone frightened her, and she opened her eyes wide.
What?
The husband shook his head.
We cannot allow Xuan into our house ever again!
How come?
Business is very good and most of our customers belong to him.
Besides, who will practice with me?
I need to prepare for the emperor's visit.
Really?
Yes, you are probably right.
Damn it!
Really?
I want to bash the face of that son-of-a-bitch!
You know that we will be blamed for our sister's behavior.
My mother already said that it is our fault for being so progressive and Europeanized.
She blames us for spoiling Snow.
Mother knows about it?
Mom and Dad want Snow to marry that bastard.
Oh no!
Why rush into things?
How can we find out?
We can't force her to be examined by a doctor.
You are right.
She probably loves him and wants to marry him.
She also knows that-if the worst has happened already-our par- ents must consent to a wedding.
Yes.
Or maybe they have not slept together yet, but, because they want to force our hand, they will arrange a quickie.
I was too angry to think straight!
But wait…there may be a solution.
First, we must make sure that they stay apart for the time being.
Then we can try to find out if that bastard Xuan has ruined her yet.
The first step is to kick that bastard Xuan out of the tailor shop and forbid him to return.
That's right!
Great idea!
As the couple returned to the tennis court, they saw the French-man's wife waving desperately from the corner window on the sec-ond floor.
Imagining the worst, they ran into the house, dashed up the stairs, and entered the room.
It seemed that little Master Blessing had sneezed four times in a row!
Mr. Civilization comforted his aunt by offering a handful of vague physiological explanations for the extra sneeze.
After she had calmed down, he sat down to contem-plate the problem of Red-Haired Xuan.
Hence, Xuan's efforts to ruin innocent Miss Snow's reputation had been a complete success.
Before him lay a greater challenge:
how to destroy the reputation of a widow who was utterly faithful to her two husbands.
A Physiological Investigation The Language of an Authentic Monk Red-Haired Xuan Reforms Buddhism While Dr. Straight Talk examined little Master Blessing on the sec-ond floor, Xuan remained downstairs in the servants' quarters.
The household staff was puzzled by his mysterious class background and social rank, but they knew that their mistress looked up to Xuan, and so they too treated him with respect.
Indeed, Xuan's easygoing man-ner put them at ease.
As with household employees everywhere, the maids and ser-vants spent their free time bad-mouthing their employers and ex-changing gossip about the foibles of the high and mighty.
the driver said.
They make such a huge fuss over nothing!
She acts like the kid is going to croak, but there's absolutely nothing wrong with him!
What's the big deal?
Can you believe that they actually called a doctor?
Master Blessing's nanny joined in the class struggle.
What about children from poor families!
They don't even have enough food to eat, and still they are not as sickly as that brat!
The cook was even more harsh.
He put forth the theory that the boy was, in fact, an ordinary human being and not a gift from Heaven or Buddha.
He suggested that the onset of puberty com-bined with an overly rich diet had induced changes in the boy's blood and general constitution.
He was merely experiencing ex-treme growing pains, a function of his remarkably precocious physi-cal development.
he insisted.
Have you noticed how he pretends to suckle Nanny's breast, just to cop a quick feel.
'No way' indeed!
He's just horny, like his mother.
How about when he forces Nanny to play horse so that he can mount her from behind.
Give me a break!
said Xuan sternly.
To save face the nanny tried to make an excuse for little Master Blessing.
It's not true.
He's just a little boy.
the driver interjected.
I've seen lots of children in my life.
Kids today become perverts much earlier than in the old days!
Some even take lovers and go to broth-els!
Even if he doesn't know what he's doing, he's gonna have to marry someone soon if he keeps it up!
How can he not be a pervert with a depraved mother like that?
He's not listless because he's going to die…he's probably just thinking up really dirty thoughts.
After expressing support for the driver's analysis, Xuan went up-stairs to consult with Dr. Straight Talk.
When he entered the room, the doctor and the gentle mother were standing nervously in front of the naked boy, who was refusing to put his clothes on.
The doctor was stumped.
Despite his mother's insistence that the boy was ill, he could find nothing wrong with the child.
said Mr. Civilization.
This suggestion upset Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer; she was afraid that it might bring bad luck to say such a thing out loud.
Dr. Straight Talk agreed.
It is probably nothing more than the onset of puberty.
Xuan butted in.
Dr. Straight Talk extended his hand to Xuan as if meeting an old confidant.
Encouraged by Xuan's support, he began to pontificate on various indelicate subjects.
Of course, of course!
I am sure that my esteemed colleague here is familiar with the theories of Freud.
Yes?
Symptoms of the nervous system indicate problems with the kidneys and can give rise to a host of peculiar conditions…While Dr. Straight Talk's erudition surprised no one, Xuan's was unexpected.
Xuan responded.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer could not follow Dr. Straight Talk's diagnosis, but she understood enough to be annoyed that it failed to highlight the fact that her son was a gift from Heaven and Buddha.
She sensed, however, that she was outnumbered and remained si-lent.
Red-Haired Xuan signaled to Dr. Straight Talk that he wished to consult with him in private.
They moved over to the window.
Although I am not the primary physician, I am quite familiar with the boy and his condition.
As a colleague, Sir, I feel it is my duty to inform you that the boy is entering puberty.
He often forces his nanny to let him suckle her breasts like some sort of three-year- old.
Dr. Straight Talk put his forefinger to his lips and nodded in agreement.
Thank you very much, Sir!
You have identified the physiological crux of the matter.
There is no avoiding the truth.
Once again, Freud provides the solution.
The boy is exhibiting signs of early puberty brought on by too much rich food, too many nice clothes, and exces-sive pampering of the body.
These factors combine to enhance his lechery.
The problem is exacerbated by the particular environment in which he lives.
Xuan stared at the window.
His ears had grown bored listening to all the unfamiliar words, and eventually they stopped paying at-tention.
At that moment several animals in the garden were engag-ing in the joys of procreation.
There were a pair of doves coupling on the roof and two pretty Japanese dogs circling each other hungrily down in the yard.
In the garden a rooster was mounting a hen.
As fate would have it, all these domestic animals were demonstrating the miraculous logic of Yin and Yang simultaneously.
Distracted by the raunchy spectacle, Xuan ignored the doctor's question.
the doctor asked again.
Xuan responded in a dazed stu-por.
Dr. Straight Talk turned to see what Xuan was staring at.
Seeing the animal love fest, he grabbed Xuan's hand once again and shook it vigorously.
My dear…dear friend!
Once again you have put your finger on an obscure but important factor influencing human behavior.
The evidence to which you allude supports our theory.
said Xuan.
Dr. Straight Talk cleared his throat and, true to his name, an-nounced the diagnosis in a direct and dignified manner.
Indeed!
There is nothing else to say!
My good friend and I have reached the same conclusion.
Mankind's greatest weakness has always been lust!
When a newborn baby suckles and caresses his mother's breasts, lust is born!
he is as susceptible to lust as any normal person.
the doctor chimed in.
What he needs is to get married.
If you're afraid that it's too early, you must begin to prepare him…to educate him.
This will not be an easy task; it will take much care and pa-tience.
why don't you ask Mr. Xuan to stay here and educate little Master Blessing.
replied Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
The Civilizations left together with Dr. Straight Talk.
Dr. Red-Haired Xuan stayed behind.
With her mind at ease, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer issued a flurry of orders to the servants and retired to her room.
In the living room Red-Haired Xuan paced back and forth, thinking to himself.
Suddenly, he heard a voice ring out from the hallway.
Is anyone home?!
Amitabha!
When he turned around, Red-Haired Xuan found himself face to face with a fashionable, modem, and surprisingly Europeanized monk.
He wore a dyed brown shirt made from Shanghai silk and a pair of sandals with rubber heels.
In his mouth Xuan noticed three gold teeth.
He was handsome and had an almost sensual look about him.
asked Red-Haired Xuan.
With your permission…Sir, I am a poor monk who lives but an ascetic and onerous existence.
In addition, I am the publisher of a newspaper called the Wooden Fish Drum.
said Xuan in an amused voice.
The monk blushed.
Sir, a singing girl can also contribute to the enlightenment of the spirit, as it is written in the Confucian Book of Music.
Monks who visit singing girls do not necessarily abandon asceticism.
Their musical diet remains strictly meatless, if you know what I mean.
They never stay overnight.
You may recall the recent case in which I, a poor monk, successfully sued a newspaper editor who accused me of lewd behavior in a house of ill repute.
No kidding?
Really?
As you can see, although I am only a poor monk, I am not without power.
The Wooden Fish Drum counts among its patrons many high mandarins, governors-general, residents superior, and military officials.
asked Red-Haired Xuan, zeroing in on a knotty Buddhist dilemma.
the monk replied.
You have heard perhaps that a new Buddhist Association with its own newspaper has been founded in our country.
We were afraid that it would cut into the popularity of our pagoda.
With one mystery of Buddhism cleared up, Red-Haired Xuan turned to another.
the monk responded enthusiastically.
As a matter of fact, one King of Venereal Disease Treatment sits on the editorial board of the Wooden Fish Drum!
He has helped us to develop an aggressive and broad-based advertising strategy.
Do not think that, just because we are monks, we do not know anything about journal-ism or pen wars!
said Xuan.
It certainly is!
Since I started the Wooden Fish Drum, our following has expanded.
The quantity of paper goods and money burned at our alters is way up, as is the number of people who worship at our pagoda.
We have also seen significant growth in coffin donations and the number of children consecrated by their parents.
It is my sacred duty as a monk to support the development of Buddhism.
Red-Haired Xuan stood up and interrupted the monk.
But why are you here, Brother?
What do you want from us?
I am not going to buy the Wooden Fish Drum.
The monk winked at Xuan.
No problem!
I am a poor monk only.
Xuan said in a loud and dignified voice.
The monk scratched his ears casually and peered intently at Xuan.
he said.
he said, adopting a tone of superiority.
Sir, I entreat you to assist this poor monk…If you can help us to expand our base of support, we are prepared to offer you a 30 percent cut.
Our business practices are completely legitimate, unlike those of our unscrupulous competitors at that new Buddhist Associa-tion.
Xuan interrupted.
If you do not reform, you will not be completely up-to-date, and, if you are not completely up-to-date, you will be eliminated.
That is true, sir!
I can tell that you are a man of great learning and experience.
Yes, of course!
But your group is not very skillful when it comes to the bottom line!
Just take a look at the new Buddhist Association!
They typically send a half-dozen monks and novices as fee-collecting ritual specialists to every funeral.
That's good business.
The future of Buddhism lies in your hands, Sir!
Please do not overcharge the Buddha.
Red-Haired Xuan slammed his fist down on the table.
In that case I will put up my own money and use the Wooden Fish Drum as a front only.
The monk rubbed his hands together.
Oh, please do not be so stingy with our pagoda.
They were still bargaining when Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer entered the room.
She had changed into a traditional robe in order to meet the monk.
Amitabha!
Greetings Venerable Teacher!
Red-Haired Xuan sat silently as the fashionable monk waxed elo-quent, devising various expensive ceremonies and providing advice to Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer about the kinds of offerings she ought to make.
The Way of the World A Faithful Female Friend Damn, Doctor Xuan Gets Angry Over the next several days intense discussions about Red-Haired Xuan took place at the Europeanization Tailor Shop and the house of Grandpa H6ng.
Two rival cliques emerged, one that supported Xuan and one that opposed him.
The opposition, led by Mr. ILL, included High School Graduate Tan and the wife of the horned senior clerk.
Among Xuan's supporters were the horned senior clerk, Miss Snow, the wife of Mr. ILL, several of the seamstresses, and virtually all of the tailors.
Hence, the majority remained in Xuan's camp.
Grandpa H6ng, Grandma, and the Civilizations refused to take a public stand either way, preferring instead to wait and see which clique was ascendent-a prudent strategy given the murkiness of the situation.
Members of Mr. ILL's opposition party were pleased now that Xuan spent all of his time at the house of Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
To them this meant that he was no longer around to soil the reputation of the Europeanization Tailor Shop.
Xuan's supporters, on the other hand, worried that his absence from the shop would be bad for business.
Rumors circulated among both groups about an impending mar-riage between Xuan and Miss Snow.
There were suspicions that Grandpa H6ng had planted the rumors (a practice common with government officials) in order to gauge public opinion before coming out in support of or opposition to the union.
If such were the case, the gambit failed because popular sentiment on the issue remained starkly divided.
While some sneered at Xuan's origins in the lower classes, others praised him as a member of the common people.
Given the subtlety of the distinction between these two groups (the lower classes and the common people), the debate raged on for days.
his detractors would say.
countered his supporters.
I know…What a pain!
mumbled Grandpa.
Grandma cautioned.
Miss Snow insisted, adopting the detached tone of a liberated woman.
For Mr. Civilization, Miss Snow's vague comments failed to con-vey a clear picture of the relationship between Xuan and his sister.
Moreover, he had long espoused the view that unfettered social relations between men and women were a healthy sign of progress and Europeanization.
Were Mr. Civilization to raise an objection to his sister's tryst, it might tarnish his progressive reputation.
Hence, although he did not support his sister, he dared not criticize her behavior openly.
he complained self-righteously to himself.
In the meantime Xuan was juggling several jobs simultaneously:
tennis professor, mentor to Master Blessing, and special advisor to Brother Tang Phu concerning the reform and renovation of Bud-dhism.
In his free time he made brief visits to the Europeanization Tailor Shop, where he liked to show off his erudition by critiquing and commenting on the latest fashions in the presence of the custom-ers and staff.
Mr. ILL's eyes reddened with rage as Xuan pointed out flaws in his designs, scolded his workers, or flirted shamelessly with his more fashionable female customers.
Sometimes he would stop by to ask a question.
On other occasions he might utter a single state-ment.
Toward Miss Snow he was cold and formal.
This hurt her but made others think that they were in love and planning to get married.
The more people discussed the matter at hand the less they agreed, and the more they argued the further they moved from the truth.
Such is the way of the world.
In the end each side began to doubt the veracity of its own arguments while growing simulta-neously to hate the opposing side even more intensely.
Among his proponents there was one person who was especially grateful and committed to Xuan because of the support he had pro-vided to her in the past.
That was Mrs. ILL.
One afternoon, after sharing a huge meal of dog meat with a handful of devout monks, Xuan left the offices of the Wooden Fish Drum and headed for home.
Red-faced and reeking of liquor, he happened unexpectedly upon the wife of Mr. ILL, who was out walking alone in one of her traditional outfits.
To Xuan she looked miserable-the unlucky wife of a man dedicated to the progressive reform of society, on the one hand, and the cruel preservation of tradition within his own family, on the other.
slurred Xuan drunkenly.
My a mi!
Mrs. ILL was pleased that Xuan had addressed her in this dar-ingly intimate and popular fashion.
It had never happened to her before!
She cautiously peered around to make sure that the street was deserted.
Seeing that it was, she bravely and fashionably ex-tended her hand to Red-Haired Xuan.
she said breathlessly.
I was just going to look for you, and here you are!
Xuan replied with an air of frivolous arrogance.
,;So much of my time these days is devoted to the development of the world of sports in general and tennis lessons in particular.
I am also helping that utterly useless Dr. Straight Talk to educate the son of Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
In addition, the head monk at the Lady Banh Pagoda has enlisted my help with his newspaper, the Wooden Fish Drum.
How can I refuse?
I do not want people to think that I am distant and unavailable!
Therefore, I have had to leave to Mr. ILL the important responsibility of reforming society through custom-made clothes.
replied Mrs. ILL, bravely addressing Xuan with the same intimate pronoun.
They began to walk together, side by side like boyfriend and girlfriend.
Mrs. ILL asked.
I trust we can be honest with each other.
Please do not be offended if I ask you a question, my friend.
Idle gossip!
Xuan replied.
Never before had Red-Haired Xuan heard such news, and it made him extremely happy.
Still, he tried to maintain an air of dispassion.
That would be very dangerous if it were true!
Xuan's statement shocked Mrs. ILL.
she retorted.
A woman like Miss Snow?
Beauti-fuL very modern, and from a rich family?
Were you to marry Miss Snow, every well-educated young man in our country of Nam would praise your prospecting skills!
Mrs. ILL's comments pleased Xuan immensely.
Suddenly, how-ever, he recalled Snow's conception of partial purity, as she had explained and demonstrated to him at the Fairyland Hotel.
Al-though he knew that Miss Snow would never give up her virginity entirely before getting married, the idea of semi-virginity troubled him.
He sighed to himself.
So many loves!
Mrs. ILL re-plied.
What scares me most is the prospect of sprouting horns.
Mrs. ILL smiled to herself.
She recognized at that moment that all men are irrationally jealous-jealous of wind and shadows.
Then she recalled how Xuan had supported her when she had endeav-ored to dress in a modern way.
She felt overcome with a sense of gratitude.
It seems that marriage-the so-called hundred-year knot-is not yet a high priority for you, my friend.
Who?
I cannot name names.
It will only breed more hatred and make me into a tattletale.
Ten more times Red-Haired Xuan asked for names but she re-fused to answer.
Mrs. ILL was very proper indeed and hated the idea that she might be thought of as a tattletale.
My only duty is to let you know that you are being maligned and slandered.
It is said that you are from a lower-class family, that you are uneducated, and that you once worked as a ball boy and as an advertiser for venereal disease treatments.
Red-Haired Xuan paused for a moment.
he said with a smirk.
If they dare to bad-mouth me like that, who knows what they will say about other people?
The nature of my background and education are known to Mr. Civilization, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer, the senior clerk, Dr. Straight Talk, and you, my dear friend.
No doubt, those scurrilous rumors were spread by that bastard Victor Ban!
Mrs. ILL asked immedi-ately.
Indeed, it was he who told the story to Miss Snow's fiance and who later confirmed it in a letter to Grandpa H6ng!
Do you know why Victor Ban hates me?
I once helped him to open a drugstore back when I was in medical school.
But I quit after discovering that he was adding bits of clay to the venereal disease medicine.
Of course, he holds a grudge against me.
Once she had been reassured about Xuan's lofty educational and social status, Mrs. ILL surmised that the time was right to tell Xuan of an important matter concerning his honor.
she began.
I have something important to tell you, but you must prom-ise to keep it secret.
Xuan was shocked.
Spit in my face?
Slap me?
Me?
Did I not save the life of the most important old man in that family?
Am I not the main reason that the Europeanization Tailor Shop has prospered as of late?
That is how they choose to repay me?
Oh no!
responded Mrs. ILL.
No!
she pleaded fearfully.
But Xuan was inconsolable.
As a reckless and truly uneducated man, he was unable to bear such a direct affront to his dignity.
At that point even a harmless joke could have provoked him to murder.
As Xuan's manner hardened, Mrs. ILL grew more and more fright-ened.
He spun around and motioned to two rickshaw men.
Rick-shaw!
Rickshaw!
Hey, you two!
Mrs. ILL pleaded with Xuan, but he ignored her.
The rickshaw pulled up in front of them.
he said to her.
You'll see.
I won't tell anyone that it was you, my friend, who told me.
Don't worry.
Trembling with fear, Mrs. ILL got into the rickshaw.
Thirty min-utes later they pulled up in front of Grandpa H'Ong's house.
The two passengers paid their drivers and entered the front door.
Everyone in Grandpa H'Ong's family was home.
Great-Grandpa was slurping down a bowl of swallow's nest porridge.
Grandpa H'Ong was smoking a pipe of opium, assisted by the opium servant.
Grandma, the Civilizations, Miss Snow, and High School Graduate Tan were sitting together in the living room.
Xuan greeted every-body, but his face was dark with anger.
He approached the bed of Great-Grandpa.
he said loudly.
Have you been sick since I cured you?
The old man stopped eating.
he said.
I have felt fine ever since you cured me.
That's fine.
Xuan walked into the outer room and approached Mr. Civiliza-tion.
Yes!
replied Mrs. Civilization on her husband's behalf.
said Xuan with mock surprise.
I'm a nobody!
A low-class vagabond!
A lowly ball boy!
Grandma kept her eyes down.
she exclaimed, looking up gingerly.
Who would dare talk like that!
Why say such a thing, Doctor?
Why do you seem so unhappy?
Miss Snow was pleased that her mother had adopted such a con-ciliatory attitude.
She whispered to Mr. ILL that it must have been her ex-fiance and Victor Ban who had slandered Xuan.
Xuan paced angrily back and forth.
were furious.
They longed to unmask Xuan there and then but were afraid of damaging their younger sister's reputation in front of the wife of Mr. ILL and the opium servant.
Instead, they stood there fuming.
Grandma was puzzled by all the conflicting developments:
Xuan's anger, the fact that he had saved Great-Grandpa's life, the fact that her daughter, Miss Snow, was now in love with him, the letter from Snow's fiance.
All of these things confused her; she no longer knew right from wrong, good from bad.
she said gently.
Xuan continued to pace back and forth.
If I get angry, it will mean trouble for everyone!
No one dared to utter a peep, and the room fell silent.
Xuan paced back and forth across the floor for ten minutes.
Only the tapping of his shoes broke the silence.
Just as his anger was begin-ning to dissipate, the horned senior clerk and his wife entered the room, hand in hand.
Everyone was startled as if zapped by an electric shock.
The se-nior postal clerk grabbed his chest and fell to the floor, moaning.
Oh my parents!
What shame!
Now everyone knows of my wife's affair!
The whole world knows!
How shameful!
Before Red-Haired Xuan realized the devastating effect of his words, a loud, distressing hiccup erupted from under the mosquito net of the old man's bed.
The family scurried in all directions.
They divided into two groups:
one lifted up the old man, and the other lifted up the senior clerk.
Please!
Grandma implored Xuan.
The old man moaned as if he were going to die.
No need for a cure!
Just let me die!
It is too shameful to live!
He hiccuped again.
Tears welled up in Grandma's eyes.
She begged Xuan to help…The whole house turned to Xuan…In the face of such a tragedy Xuan let down his guard.
he murmured in a soft and honest voice.
I am com-pletely uneducated.
I was once a ball boy from a lower-class family.
Fast as a thief, Xuan exited the house and ran away.
Grandma was regretful, but others criticized Xuan for allowing his hatred of the family to interfere with his professional duty.
He did not really deserve to be a doctor, they thought.
The Happiness of a Family in Mourning The Contribution of Civilization An Exemplary Funeral Three days later the old man died.
the family spent the days prior to his death bringing in all manner of quacks-Eastern quacks and Western quacks, old ones and young ones.
Xuan remained out of sight during Great-Grandpa's demise, and, as a result, his medical reputation soared.
Grandma sent people to find him but to no avail.
Without Dr. Xuan all hope was lost; none of the real doctors could help the old man.
When Dr. Straight Talk learned that his colleague Dr. Xuan was avoiding the patient, he also refused to take the case.
Here was a lesson for those who dared to say that Xuan was from an uneducated, lower-class family, that he had been a vagabond and a ball boy…The herbalists Dr. Spleen and Dr. Lung were also asked to treat the patient, but, like the other respected doctors, they too refused.
Another suggestion was to use the sacred medicine from the Bia Pagoda.
In a recent case mud and buffalo shit taken from this source had been administered to patients suffering from tuberculosis and typhoid, and both had died.
A subse-quent investigation revealed that the sacred properties of the medi-cine had been falsely promoted by a band of village tyrants who had recently embezzled from the public budget.
Hence, the medicine was no longer considered sacred.
As a result of these various factors, the old man, already well into his eighties, died peacefully.
I know, what a pain.
exactly 1,872 times.
Great-Grandpa's death made many people happy.
Grandpa H6ng told the horned senior clerk that he and his wife should expect to receive at least several thousand piasters.
The senior clerk was pleas-antly surprised that his invisible horns had proved so lucrative.
He credited Xuan's advertising skills for netting such a valuable profit and planned to go into business with him in the future.
Sir, this product is the best.
He planned to meet Xuan immediately so as to pay him the remaining five piasters that he owed him.
One must demonstrate the value of one's word, he thought, before entering into business together.
Grandpa H6ng closed his eyes tightly and dreamed about how he would soon be able to wear funeral clothes, lean on a funeral cane, and cough, spit, and cry in public all at the same time.
Grandpa H6ng was very sure that the funeral and his funeral cane would leave a great impression.
The main concern of Grandpa's son, Mr. Civilization, was that a lawyer should witness the death of his paternal grandfather.
This would ensure that the old man's will would actually be carried out in practice as opposed to existing solely in some theoretical nether-world.
His only remaining worry was what to do with Red-Haired Xuan.
While it was true that Xuan had committed two mistakes-he had seduced one of his younger sisters and denounced the lustful indiscretion of his other one-he had, inadvertently perhaps, pro-voked the propitious death of the old man.
Two small mistakes, one big favor…how to react?
Mr. Civilization rubbed his hands pen-sively through his hair.
Fortunately, his puzzled visage resembled the face of someone mourning the death of a family member.
In fact, a sense of puzzlement and anxiety reigned over the whole affair.
After the corpse was authenticated by the relevant authorities, the deceased party was wrapped in a shroud and left idle for over a day.
Even though all the funeral plans had been long completed, Grandpa H6ng did not order the ceremony to begin.
The younger generation-Grandpa's children and their spouses-began com-plaining about the slowness of the older generation.
High School Graduate Tan was restless-eager to use the cameras that he had prepared for the occasion.
Mrs. Civilization was anxious to wear her fashionable new mourning clothes.
This outfit (including the white hat with black lace trim) had the potential to bring happiness to many grieving family members despite the painful death of a loved one.
The delay of the funeral annoyed Mr. ILL because none of his new mourning designs appeared in public and hence were not cov-ered in the press.
Mr. Civilization was blamed for failing to intervene to end the delay.
Grandma was chided for following the old traditions too closely and generally stirring up trouble.
The real reason for the delay was because of Miss Snow, or, more precisely, because of what Red-Haired Xuan had done to Miss Snow.
Grandma returned from Snow's fiance's house.
In front of the innocent eyes of the pious children and grandchildren waiting anx-iously to bury the corpse of Great-Grandfather, she gestured silently for Mr. Civilization to follow her upstairs to Grandpa H6ng's room.
Grandpa had just finished his sixtieth opium pipe of the day.
The opium servant had stepped out for a moment, leaving the old man to enjoy the residue of opium left in his lungs.
Upon seeing Grandma, he sat up.
What's going on, Grandma?
Grandma sat down quietly next to him.
Mr. Civilization also took a chair and sat down near the bed.
Grandma sighed.
They have not given up the marriage.
They haven't done anything.
The family is still coming here to express their condo-lences.
They do not want to move up the wedding.
Are they going to do it or not?
Do they still plan to marry their son to Snow, or do they think that she has been ruined?
Grandma asked Grandpa.
Grandpa snapped.
Grandpa and Grandma continued to quarrel in a way common among old, traditional couples from respectable families-families in which husbands and wives never calmly discuss anything for more than fifteen minutes.
No way!
I think that they have always wanted to break up the marriage.
Why do you think they still want to express their condolences?
Perhaps it is some sort of trick!
They do not cancel the marriage now, but they do not plan to go through with it either.
That way n o one else will dare to ask Snow's hand in marriage.
'Tm not so sure!
Maybe they are just as confused as we are.
Even we do not know for sure whether our daughter has been ruined or not!
When I told them that we should move the wedding date up before the funeral to save money rather than wait for three more years, they replied that their son is still young and only a student.
They see no need to rush the wedding.
So, what should we do now?
I think we should ask Dr. Xuan to marry her before the funeral.
Grandma bit her lip.
He had also called attention to the horns of her son-in-law, the senior clerk, directly to his face, an announcement that brought shame to her other daughter.
Xuan's hot temper was scary.
She felt that she would be overcome with shame in his presence.
It would be an honor to have such a noble son-in-law but also very frightening.
Children are spoiled by their mothers; grandchildren are spoiled by their grandmothers.' You have contributed to the ruin of Snow.
You have made us all look bad.
Grandpa nodded.
What do you think, toa?
A grown-up daughter at home is as dangerous as a bomb in the house.
Toa should think of a way to send the girl off somewhere.
Mr. Civilization scratched his head and thought for a while.
I don't know.
People already think that she loves Xuan.
If we marry her off to Xuan before the funeral, aren't we admitting that she has been ruined by him?
I say we ignore the whole mess and take care of the funeral first.
Then, later on, if they still want their son to marry Snow, we'll do it.
Otherwise, we'll marry her to Xuan.
Grandma asked.
Mr. Civilization responded.
Grandpa H6ng liked the idea of having a son-in-law like Xuan.
Although he would have preferred everything settled then and there, he voiced agreement with his son's plan.
Mr. Civilization furrowed his brow, trying to think of a way to wash away some of the nastier blemishes from Red-Haired Xuan's past.
It was the only way to save face.
While he had once been angry that so many people misunderstood Xuan in the past, this fact was now a source of so-lace.
As with many fashionable men who made mistakes, he pre-ferred to patch up what could be fixed rather than going through the embarrassment of admitting an error.
he said, rising to his feet.
I will arrange an honorable marriage for Snow.
The three descended the stairs and started to make arrangements for the funeral.
The children and grandchildren were happy and pleased…Merrily, they went off to deliver the obituary, to order the clarinetists, and to rent the funeral cart.
Many guests arrived to pay their respects, to make ritual offerings, and to express condolences.
The funeral began at exactly seven the next morning.
Two police-men from the eighteenth precinct, Min toa and Min da, were hired to maintain order.
They were pleased to get the work, since there had been few people to fine as of late, and they had begun to re-semble businessmen on the verge of bankruptcy.
Everyone in the family of the deceased seemed content, with the exception of Miss Snow.
Why hadn't Xuan made ritual offerings?
Why hadn't he at-tended the funeral?
Had he lost respect for her?
These questions nagged at Miss Snow; they made her so miserable that she thought of suicide.
A needle pierced her heart as she looked in vain for her boyfriend among the crowd of mourners.
On the day of the funeral Miss Snow wore the outfit Innocence-a long, see-through dress over a bra with black lace trim that re-vealed her underarms and the top half of her breasts.
She also wore a pretty mourning hat.
With so many rumors swirling around about the defilement of her honor, Miss Snow selected Innocence to pro-vide some reassurance that she had not lost her virginity completely.
Carrying a small tray, she wandered among the crowd offering betel nuts and cigarettes.
Her face looked vaguely sad and romantic, a fashionable mourning pose for the time.
Close friends of Grandpa H6ng crowded around the coffin.
Their jaws were covered with beards-long ones, short ones, black, red, and brown ones, some sparse, some dense, and some curly.
Their faces were all set off by large pairs of ears.
On their chests were dozens of medals:
the Le-gion of Honor, the Imperial Medal, the Cambodian Medal, and the Ten Thousand Elephants Medal.
They were moved by the mournful tones emanating from the clarinets and by the glimpses of Miss Snow's white arms and breasts that they managed to catch through her see-through dress.
Given the mixture of Vietnamese, Chinese, and French traditions on display, the funeral resembled a large festival.
There was a large house made from paper and bamboo, a roasted pig under an um-brella, and a trumpet.
There were scores of wreaths and at least three hundred banners displaying parallel couplets.
Led by High School Graduate Tan, a handful of amateur photographers took pic-tures.
There were hundreds of people there.
Such a big funeral could almost bring a smile to the lips of the corpse in the coffin!
During the funeral procession Mr. ILL, his wife, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer, and Mr. Joseph Thie't criticized Xuan's failure to make an appearance.
As they passed the fourth intersection, the procession came to an abrupt halt as if stalled at a traffic accident.
From one of the cross-streets six carts, each carrying a large umbrella and a team of monks from the Lady Banh Pagoda, merged into the procession right behind the flag carriers.
Two huge mourning wreaths, one from the Wooden Fish Drum and one from Xuan himself were added to the procession.
High School Graduate Tan hurriedly snapped several pictures before running back to inform his mother.
Grandma ran forward, very moved by the fact that the wreaths were from Xuan, the famous doctor and advisor to the Wooden Fish Drum.
It greatly enhanced the solemnity of the funeral.
she exclaimed.
Brother Tang Phu sat contentedly upon one of the carts.
He was certain that his presence there would be seen as a victory for the Wooden Fish Drum and as a defeat for the new Buddhist Association.
After making sure that all his arrangements had been carried out correctly, Red-Haired Xuan joined the funeral procession.
Miss Snow gazed at him lovingly, her face radiating gratitude.
As usual, he was the object of intense praise and bitter jealousy.
The funeral procession made a strong impression wherever it went.
It seemed that the whole city took notice of its size and pomp.
It was just as Grandpa H6ng had wished.
Mr. ILL and Mrs. Civiliza-tion were especially pleased with the public attention showered on the funeral fashions of the Europeanization Tailor Shop.
Grandma was relieved that, far from being angry, Dr. Xuan had helped to make the funeral among the biggest and most honored in recent memory.
The funeral continued…Vietnamese, Chinese, and French clarinets played on in tum.
The mourners maintained somber expressions, all the while whispering excitedly to each other about their wives and their children, about the new houses and furniture they had purchased, or about the new clothes that they had had made.
A large number of the mourners were young, fashionable lady friends of Miss Snow, Mrs. Civiliza-tion, Mrs. Sunset, and Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
There were all sorts of fashionable men and women-flirting, courting, gossiping, teasing, arranging trysts, and making each other jealous-all the while maintaining the appropriately sorrowful expressions of mourn-ers at a funeral.
Interspersed with the requisite sobs and barbs that ring out at any funeral, the following whispered sentences were also overheard.
To whose family does that pretty girl belong?
The one next to her is even hotter!
Yes, yes, that bastard is a real creep!- Didn't his wife leave him?-Two husbands already!-She's not too old!-Those breasts look awfully French!-Can't you fix me up with her?-Did you say a gold mine or lead rnine?-No more dates at all?-The wife is so fat, and the husband is so skinny.
The funeral continued…When the coffin was lowered into the tomb, High School Gradu- ate Tan, in his long white mourning gown, forced each person to lean this way or that, to bend backwards or forwards, and to strike certain poses so that he could capture their presence at the moment the coffin was lowered into the ground.
His friends jumped up and down on the surrounding tombs to get shots from different angles.
Holding his hat in his hand, Red-Haired Xuan stood solemnly next to the horned senior clerk.
When Grandpa H6ng coughed and spit and cried and fell unconscious to the ground, the horned senior clerk began to wail:
Everybody remarked on the good behavior of the nephew-in-law.
The horned senior clerk cried so much that he almost fainted, and Xuan had to help him up.
But, despite his best efforts, Xuan could not hold him straight.
In his huge white turban and long white mourning gown, the senior clerk continued to wail.
Red-Haired Xuan wanted to release him.
Suddenly, he felt the senior clerk slipping a folded-up five piaster note into his hand.
He held it so that no one could see it.
Then he went to look for Brother Tang Phu, who was lost among the three hundred mourners.
A Glorious and Happy Misunderstanding!
Red-Haired Xuan Conquers the Police Mr. Civilization caught a glimpse of Xuan.
he thought to himself.
Clothes and food really make a difference.
Now, how to approach this?
How to make him register his name at the General Department without causing a fuss?
How to explain that, since I plan to marry my sister to him, I need to elevate him from a lowly ball boy to a tennis amateur?
As he was mulling all this over, Xuan opened the gate and ex-tended a hand.
What's up?
'Tm free as a bird.
Mr. Civilization ignored the compliment.
he said abruptly.
Don't ask.
Civilization waited ten minutes before Xuan returned, properly attired.
Xuan's old boss called two rickshaws but did not reveal their destination to him.
Xuan had no idea where they were going.
Hey, what about the rumor that you ruined my sister?
Red-Haired Xuan was scared.
He imagined that they were off to the Police Station, the Department of Counter-Espionage, or the Court, where he would be locked up and subjected to unspeakable tortures as punishment for ruining a respectable girl from a good family.
He paused for a moment before the rickshaw.
Mr. Civiliza-tion thought to himself.
Xuan blurted out, interrupting Civilization's train of thought.
I want to apologize.
Snow loves me, and I love Snow.
If you try to keep us apart, it will kill us.
Mr. Civilization was shocked.
There was no longer any doubt about it!
His younger sister had been ruined!
If Snow did not marry Xuan, then nobody would marry her!
There was nothing to do now but to try to save as much face as possible.
he said resolutely.
We can solve this.
But first we have to make you more respectable.
I want you to register your name at the General Athletic Department as an amateur tennis player.
Then you will be able to compete for the championship against the top players in all of Tonkin.
Yes!
I am a progressive person.
I do not distinguish between the different classes!
As a devoted sports fan, I first recognized your potential athletic value to our country and decided to rescue you on the day you were fired.
Isn't that right?
Since you've been working for us, your social status has gradually improved.
Today you are a different person.
It is no accident that you fell in love with my sister!…It was probably predestined.
In any case, I always in-tended for my sister to marry you.
Xuan's image of the General Athletic Department contrasted agreeably with what he knew of the Police Station, the Department of Counter-Espionage, and the Court.
Still, he recalled his inglorious past and felt himself unfit to be Snow's husband.
He thought it best to refuse Civilization's offer.
Monsieur, Snow only loves me be-cause you once jokingly told Great-Grandfather that I was a medical student.
It will be a terrible mistake for Snow to marry me.
Xuan's words made Civilization ashamed.
He had caused a huge injustice, all on account of a harmless white lie.
he said, trying to assuage his own guilt.
You actually do know some-thing about medicine.
But, because diplomas mean everything in this old-fashioned society, I had to stretch the truth a little.
Xuan replied sadly.
But I urge you to reconsider!
Snow is beautiful, rich, and from a modem and culti-vated family.
As you know, I was orphaned during my childhood.
I worked as a ball boy and sold roasted peanuts on the street.
I did many lowly jobs.
Mr. Civilization frowned.
Mr. Civilization thought to himself.
Why does he needle me like this?
A dowry like my sister's, and still he holds out for more!
It's no matter!
There are no lowly jobs, only lowly people.
Take me, for instance; I have the mind of a common person.
And I would love nothing more than to have a common, younger brother-in-law like you.
Moreover, Snow has her own fortune.
You will not have to worry about hard work anymore if you agree to marry her.
Xuan remained unconvinced.
No, I dare not accept.
this is a matter for your conscience!
You have ruined the reputation of a girl from a respectable family.
I want to solve this problem.
The threat scared Xuan.
Mr. Civilization sighed.
He was overcome with a sensation of happiness and relief, commonly felt among people who succeed in forcing others to marry against their will.
Satisfied that the marriage would go forward, he motioned for Xuan to get in the rickshaw.
Arriving at the General Athletic Department, Red-Haired Xuan felt the road to fame and success opening wide before him.
The driveway was full of beautiful cars.
Elegantly clad Vietnamese and French men entered and exited along with fashionable Vietnamese ladies and French madames.
They all exuded the luxurious air of the upper classes.
Xuan knew that he had truly arrived.
Oh, sports!
Glorious sports!
What can't you accomplish?
Hip hip hooray!
As his mind raced with various lofty ideas about the future of our race, Mr. Civilization led him to a large, solenm-looking office.
On the walls were paintings of tennis and boxing matches, fencing contests, swimming races, pole vaulting tournaments, bicycle com-petitions, racing cars, round footballs, and not-so-round footballs.
Many people approached Mr. Civilization and Red-Haired Xuan to shake their hands.
As conversations unfolded noisily in French, a look of scorn and annoyance passed over Xuan's face.
His expression suggested a profound reverence for the mother tongue and resent-ment toward those who used French when it was unnecessary.
The French speakers seemed equally annoyed with Xuan's attitude.
Mr. Civilization thought it best to introduce Xuan immediately.
Messieurs, this is my friend Xuan, a tennis professor.
He is here to register on the list of tennis amateurs.
One of the intellectuals turned to Xuan and addressed him at some length in French.
Xuan pursed his lips in disgust.
the man replied sheepishly, acknowledging his disrespect to the mother tongue.
Xuan bowed his head.
Thank you very much, Sir!
I have seen you play many times, and I admire you.
You have a bright future.
We have been worried that Tonkin has no one who can compete against Annam and Cochin-china, but now we are fortunate to have you.
They shook hands solemnly and said good-bye.
As the director of the General Athletic Department had yet to arrive, everyone took the opportunity to make the acquaintance of everyone else.
Hence, Xuan was able to meet a wide range of amateur tennis players, including several sons of province chiefs and governors.
of playing against Xuan for the championship in the near future.
He was inundated with praise and compliments.
Those confident of defeating him dis-played a false modesty, while those who were afraid they would lose to Xuan were careful not to offend him.
Sports reporters from three daily newspapers vied to interview him.
The fact that a tennis professor-a tennis professional, in other words-had registered his name on the amateur list was big news in sporting circles.
Civilization knew that he had to promote Xuan's reputation carefully, so he remained by his side like a faith-ful dog beside its master.
He was afraid that he would lose face if Xuan made an embarrassing gaffe.
But Xuan was cautious, well behaved, and maintained the scornful visage of a genuine member of the upper classes.
When faced with a difficult question, Xuan simply smacked his lips, clicked his tongue, and gestured haughtily to Mr. Civilization.
The arrangement was not without benefits for Civilization.
they allowed his manager to stand next to him in the picture.
Striking a pose often adopted by talented and confident men, Xuan would occasionally tap Civilization on the shoulder and whis-per intimately into his ear:
You will ride my coattails to fame and success just like the managers of Chim and Giao before you!
Mr. Civilization realized that what Xuan said was probably true, even though it was he who was masterminding Xuan's reputation.
After signing his name in the register in front of a handful of French men and the chairman of the Athletic Council, Xuan and his manager completed a final round of handshakes and sauntered out of the office.
Turning a corner, they ran smack into two policemen.
It was like a head-on collision between automobiles.
Immediately, Xuan recognized the two officers as Min dO' and Min toa from the Eighteenth Precinct.
One of the officers opened his notebook and took out a pencil to write a ticket.
We entered on the right side.
But you two Monsieurs entered on the left.
Civilization protested.
There is no such law.
We are inside a building, not out on the street.
Red-Haired Xuan thrust his chest forward.
I am Me sir Xuan, tennis professor.
The policemen looked hesitantly at each other.
After a moment one thrust his own chest forward.
I am Me sit Min dO', an officer of the fourth rank and owner of a victory medal.
I won first prize in the Tour de Hanoi-Ha Dong and second prize in the Tour de Hanoi-D Son.
The other officer followed his friend's example.
I am Me sit Min toa, an officer of the fifth rank and winner of the first prize in the Hanoi-Nam Dinh Cup, the Laundry Boy Cup, and the Melia Jaune Cup.
Transfixed by their own credentials, the officers stood there in silence, forgetting to write the tickets.
Mr. Civili-zation said encouragingly.
one of the officers said in agree-ment.
We have sixteen streets to patrol day and night.
the other officer added.
We practice ru-lfp in crowded streets!
It prepares us for long-distance races.
Since we rarely write tickets, bicycle training helps us to overcome our boredom!
Long live sports!
said Red-Haired Xuan, nod-ding his head.
Quite right!
the officers responded in unison.
Xuan said.
On the contrary.
Our recent collision was little more than a sport-ing accident.
The officers hesitated.
They looked at each other, trying to deter-mine whether Xuan's comment was strictly legal.
Xuan continued.
Soon we will be sitting to-gether at the emperor's banquet for sports champions.
How can you even consider writing us a ticket?
yelled Mr. Civilization.
It's illegal to write such a ticket.
Officer Min toa waved his hand.
We're policemen, for goodness sake!
Our concern is tickets, not laws!
Only ordinary people worry about transgressions of the law, not officers of the state!
said Red-Haired Xuan.
But enough already!
Then we are all in this sporting village together.
We are all glorify-ing our race.
If you write us a ticket, we will become enemies.
It is better to be friends.
We should help each other!
the officers asked.
We will tell everyone that you are the best cycling officers around; that you always carry out your duties diligently, maintain law and order in the city, and that you will certainly win the Tour de Hanoi-Saigon.
The officers nodded, shook hands with Civilization and Xuan, and put away their tickets.
They had fulfilled their duties as police-men and followed the law to the letter.
exclaimed Miss Snow.
I am so happy!
Who could have imagined that our marriage plans would succeed so easily?
I'm so happy I could just die!
Oblivious to the romantic and poetic dimensions of her state-ment, Xuan frowned deeply.
Suicide!
Miss Snow pointed to the White Bamboo Lake.
If we were to jump to our deaths together into those silvery waves, the country would talk forever about our passionate love affair.
But never mind-I'm only joking.
Xuan snapped in reply.
They set off on a leisurely walk.
It was eight in the morning, but the sun had yet to appear through the dense layers of white clouds.
Perhaps it did not want to disturb the young lovers.
The wind blew gently.
Xuan and Miss Snow had planned a classic tryst:
a lengthy walk along Old Fish Road.
Xuan related the whole story about how Mr. Civilization had insisted that he marry Miss Snow.
Although this hurt her self-esteem a little, she was still happy.
Given that Xuan had actually been forced to marry her, Miss Snow's suicidal impulse was indeed appropriate.
Both Xuan and Snow were very content.
Because you are so silly.
You relied on me to ruin your respect-able reputation.
Miss Snow shrugged her shoulders.
Because I am honest!
That's right!
Thanks to those rubber breasts, we came to appreci-ate each other's honesty!
Our happiness is the result of those rubber breasts-the rubber breasts of social reform…/1 Miss Snow shrieked with joy.
Long live Europeanization!
Suddenly, Miss Snow spied something in the distance that made her frown.
It was a young man running toward them wearing tradi-tional clothes:
a turban, a floor-length silk gown, and a pair of old-fashioned shoes.
Miss Snow stamped her feet in annoyance.
It's my old fiance, the one I rejected to marry you.
He probably wants to quarrel with me!
I really don't want to see him.
I'll let you handle this.
Go ahead and teach him a lesson.
I'll wait for you at Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer's house.
Miss Snow turned and flagged a rickshaw.
Xuan nodded good-bye to her.
Then he folded his arms and waited for the quarrel to begin.
The young man approached Xuan and greeted him with his hands together, in the manner of a traditional Confucian scholar.
Red-Haired Xuan dismissed the gesture.
How old-fashioned!
Not evolved at all!
Sports!
The young man was both frightened and angry.
Red-Haired Xuan bowed his head.
he said, puff-ing out his chest.
The young man recognized that Xuan had seized the upper hand.
It is I who am honored!
Forgive me for disturbing you, Sir.
Even though you are talented, you should not try to harm other people.
If I am not mistaken, you are in the process of stealing my wife.
Please, Sir.
I am not famous.
I have no talent.
Red-Haired Xuan unleashed one of his now famous second-hand speeches on the young man.
You…are unfashionable and old-fashioned!
You are unreasonable!
I am a member of the Europeaniza-tion Movement.
The future fate of our nation-whether it evolves toward civilization or descends into barbarity-lies in my hands!
Never mind what those old-fashioned moralists say!
We do not only'reform the outside'!
Our society will progress according to the basic laws of evolution.
During this deeply reformist era, everything con-servative will be eliminated!
You are not Europeanized enough!
You are an obstacle along the road of evolution!
Sports…Race…Health!
the young man replied.
I have a diploma from a good secondary school.
In terms of family background, I am the son of a senior clerk and the grandson of a district chief…I am more than a suitable match for Miss Snow.
Xuan replied tersely.
Do you have a popular background?
How strange you are!
You do not understand contemporary mores!
The young man seemed embarrassed!
Not only were his clothes old-fashioned, but his background was unfashionably respectable!
Everything about him was wrong.
Before he could muster a response, Xuan raised his hand and continued:
I am from a lower-class family!
In the past I sold roasted peanuts on the street and Tiger Balm aboard the trains.
I even worked as an errand boy for the theater!
And still I am able to marry Grandpa H6ng's daughter!
Xuan's statement frightened the jilted fiance.
He guessed that Xuan was sarcastically repeating the baseless rumors spread about him by Victor Ban.
In fact, he imagined, Xuan must come from an extremely exalted background.
The young man squirmed painfully like a worm under a boot.
If you insist, Monsieur, I will concede.
But, as a man of honor, I must warn you that we are now life-and- death rivals.
The young man bowed politely and left.
His threat troubled Red- Haired Xuan, who stood mulling it over for several minutes.
He hailed a rickshaw and returned home, where his betrothed awaited him.
A sense of contentment returned to Xuan after he reflected on the lesson that he had just taught the young man.
The life-and-death rivalry was not worth worrying about, he surmised, because of the great difficulty involved in actually killing someone.
When he arrived home, it was 10:00 A.
M.
and Miss Snow was leafing through a photo album, waiting for him.
Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer and little Master Blessing had yet to wake up.
Xuan was happy for the respite, even if it was only for a half-hour.
Now he could talk to his girlfriend without fear of being disturbed.
Of course.
I explained, with perfect logic, why he has no hope with you.
I showed him that it is pure folly for him to compete with me!
It turns out that he is not an unreasonable person.
Yes!
' Miss Snow jumped up and embraced Xuan around the neck.
Red-Haired Xuan stepped forward to receive his hard-earned and well-deserved kisses.
he whispered in her ear.
Miss Snow pursed her lips in a manner so moral she appeared truly beyond reproach.
Hey!
Hey!
Forget it!
Miss Snow pushed Xuan aside.
Xuan shook his head.
They are in the back of the house!
Quiet.
Please permit me to love you.
Fearing that she would be considered disobedient, Miss Snow relented, and they moved to the di vang.
Miss Snow closed her eyes.
l.
Divan (sofa).
Her expression suggested that she was dreaming about how the cancellation of her previous engagement and the recent revolution in her petty, old-fashioned family was about to bring her a great dose of individual happiness.
At that moment she longed to write a novel about her life to provide an example for liberated women in the future.
Suddenly, the door swung open, and Mrs. Deputy Customs Offi-cer rushed in, an angry expression on her face.
The lovers were startled and released each other.
When had she awakened?
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was still in her sleeping gown.
She poked her finger in Miss Snow's face like a jealous wife.
Is my house a brothel?
Do you know that you are dirtying my house, Miss?
Do you know that your behavior is loose and immoral?
Get out of my house immediately!
Appropriately embarrassed, Miss Snow got up and left.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer turned to Xuan.
How can you be so thoughtless?
Don't you know what a bad thing you've done?
Xuan shrugged his shoulders.
Yes!
Snow is my fiancee!
Yesterday Mr. Civilization insisted that I marry her!
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was struck dumb like a wooden statue.
Her sleeping gown, however, revealed as much as if she had actually been nude.
The seductive image exerted a strange obsessive power over Xuan, who was already angry and excited.
In search of release he grabbed the faithful widow and held her in a tight embrace.
Meekly attempting to maintain her fidelity toward her two ex-husbands, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer uttered a few words of protest before being pulled down to the couch.
Hey, Mr. Xuan!
But at that moment our Red-Haired Xuan did not care about pro-priety or morality.
He was determined to get some release and so pretended to be deaf.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer moaned but in a low voice, like a faithful widow.
Oh my goodness!
It's killing me!
Outside the door screams echoed out.
No way!
Little Master Blessing rushed downstairs.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer stopped moaning.
Don't worry.
She continued to moan but softly, so as not to be interrupted.
It's killing me!
Oh my neighbors and my fellow villagers!
I am so miser-able!
Five minutes later there was a knock at the door.
The two hur-riedly arranged their clothes and moved to chairs in different comers of the room.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer said in a loud, dignified voice.
In walked Officers Min dO' and Min toa.
They were followed by little Master Blessing's nanny and the cook.
What?
Who called policemen into this house?
Why do I need to be rescued?
Was it the nanny or the cook?
The cook blanched.
when little Master Blessing called me upstairs, I heard someone moaning.
Min toa explained.
Moaning?
Oh yes!
replied the quick-witted Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer.
Officer Min dO' laughed heartily.
That's funny!
The mistress turned angrily to her servant.
If you make a mistake like that again, I will cut your god-damned throat!
Xuan added.
Everyone stared uneasily at each other.
To break the tension, Red-Haired Xuan introduced the two policemen to the still-dignified mistress.
Allow me to introduce Officer Min dO', a policeman of the fourth rank and recent winner of the Medal of Victory.
He earned first prize in the Tour de Hanoi-Db SO'n and second prize at the Tour de Hanoi-Ha Dong.
He represents the future of the police!…And here we have Officer Min toa:
winner of the Laundry Boy Cup and the Melia Jaune Cup.
The officers then dutifully introduced Xuan to Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer.
Xuan feared it would be impolite if no one introduced Mrs. Dep-uty Customs Officer.
Everyone was pleased.
The two officers, however, were still a little disappointed that they had been unable to carry out their du-ties.
explained one of the officers.
But it appears that nothing has transpired.
It is not right to toy with officers of the state.
you must understand the nature of our responsibilities.
Although we would like to'live and let live'…we have wasted valuable time and energy rushing over here.
We need to write some kind of ticket.
It is not acceptable to disturb officers of the state.
Eager to put the case behind her, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer nodded her assent.
It was an agreeable resolution for all involved.
Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer retained her reputation for unswerving fidelity to her two ex-husbands.
Red-Haired Xuan avoided a prison sentence.
And the police station of the Eighteenth Precinct did not have to waste its time with a complicated investigation.
A Plot Red-Haired Xuan Spies on the Police A Doctor's Promise Red-Haired Xuan stepped off the tennis court.
There was only one more week before the emperor embarked on his imperial journey to the North, and, since Mrs. Civilization hoped to win the Women's Cup, Xuan had to practice with her constantly.
It was almost seven o'clock and dark outside when they ended their session.
Xuan turned down a dinner invitation from his manager (that's right-his manager!), Mr. Civilization.
He had something important on his mind…What a pain!
That afternoon Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer had whined, in that poetic way of hers, that he should help salvage her reputation as a faithful widow.
For some unknown reason their se-cret love affair-if we can call it that-had been completely exposed.
It had become a source of rumors and near-constant gossip.
Ever considerate of other people, Xuan acknowledged that he had despoiled a virtuous woman.
He was full of regret but could not undo what he had done, nor could he control the rampant spread of lurid stories.
It was as if the walls had ears and the forest veins!
As he strolled the streets like a philosopher-hands in his pockets, racket tucked under his arm-Xuan spied the shriveled, weather-beaten old fortune-teller.
He was walking with an umbrella on one shoulder and an old pair of shoes in his hand.
He greeted Xuan but dared not ask too many questions.
Recalling that he owed his fame and position partly to the fortune-teller, Red-Haired Xuan thought it would be a decent gesture to express his gratitude by treating the old man to a big meal.
Although he had earned a few piasters by reading the fortune of Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer, the fortune-teller re-mained as poor as before.
I would like to invite you to eat and drink with me.
The fortune-teller agreed.
Xuan called rickshaws, and a half-hour later the two sat at the colU'\ter in the Tri~u Chau Hotel on Hang Bu6m Street.
The restaurant was very crowded.
It seemed that all of Hanoi was feverishly preparing to welcome the king.
The Protector-ate Government planned to organize five days of festivals during which many new and unusual games would be played.
Rumor had it that not only was our emperor planning to visit the North but that the king of a neighboring country might be there as well.
And not merely the king of Cambodia or Laos but the king of Siam.
The reason for his visit was that Germany and Japan had recently per-suaded the Siamese government to attempt to reclaim traditional lands from Indochina by publishing a map in which the territory of Siam extended beyond the Hoanh mountain range.
To maintain peace in the Far East the Indochinese government implemented a skillful diplomatic policy.
Newspapers from all three regions de-nounced the Siamese as barbarians while simultaneously singing the praises of the Vietnamese-describing them as the children of drag-ons and the grandchildren of fairies whose culture and literature stretched back thousands of years.
As a result, the papers contin-ued, the Vietnamese were not afraid of the Siamese and would willingly fight them if necessary.
To try to improve relations between the countries, on the one hand, and to let the arrogant Siamese know that we are the children of dragons and the grandchildren of fairies, on the other, the Protectorate Government invited the king of Siam to travel to Vietnam.
Hence, all of Hanoi was busily making arrangements to welcome the two monarchs.
The Tri'eu Chau Restau-rant was bursting with people who were to benefit from the festivi-ties or were required t~ play a role in them-contractors, spies, businessmen, dancing girls, artists, and athletes.
After ordering a range of dishes and several rounds of alcohol, Red-Haired Xuan prepared to ask the fortune-teller (the modern-day reincarnation of Quy C6c Tu and Gia Cat) about his future-his chil-dren, marriage, fame, and honor-and about his affair with Mrs. Dep-uty Customs Officer.
Suddenly, he overheard his name mentioned in a conversation taking place on the other side of a wooden panel.
He winked to the fortune-teller and gestured for him to listen in.
Two people were speaking.
You said his name is Red-Haired Xuan?
I will take you to the tennis court tomorrow afternoon and show him to you.
They were silent for a moment.
Xuan frowned and looked at the fortune-teller, who had started drinking well before the food arrived.
The voices continued.
No!
I want him in jail!
He has made my life miserable.
I am an educated man!
I will not be satisfied with less than five years in jail and ten years in exile.
I have a plan already.
I promise.
But what's the plan?
It's very good!
Not only will my rival end up in jail, but he will miss the tennis tournament!
Once we take action, we must go all the way.
Otherwise, there's no point.
Me?
My role is even more heroic than yours.
I will scream:'Long live the Popular Front Government!
But then only those found to have leaflets in their pockets will be taken into custody.
The two of us will bear witness to the fact that it was Xuan who yelled the slogan.
I see!
But why will they arrest someone for yelling:'Long live the current government!
That's easy!
Although France, which rules over us, is a democ-racy, we are a monarchy with a king.
Siam is also a monarchy!
To welcome the kings with slogans supporting democracy implies a desire to overthrow the monarchy!
The Protectorate Government is very sensitive about this sort of thing.
What a clever plan!
Of course!
I will put my whole heart into it!
Red-Haired Xuan stood up and peered through a small hole in the wooden panel.
There he saw the ex-fiance of Miss Snow eating and drinking with a man wearing shorts, Chinese shoes, a cap, and his hair up in a bun.
The man resembled a certain kind of old-fashioned gangster.
After committing the man's face to memory, Xuan calmly returned to his table and resumed drinking with the fortune-teller.
The waiter brought several dishes of delicious food, which the fortune-teller hungrily devoured.
There is someone who hates you and wishes you harm.
You must be very careful!
The fortune-teller punctuated his prophesy by gracefully drop-ping an entire roasted sparrow into his mouth.
Before Xuan could pick up the conversation, he noticed two men at a nearby table who resembled secret police agents.
Their pants were cuffed in a way distinctive of police officers, suggesting that they actually hoped to be recognized, despite their undercover status.
Red-Haired Xuan moved his seat closer so as to eavesdrop on their conversation.
He was spying on the spies.
We have received our orders!
The destiny of society lies in our hands.
Our mission is top secret.
State policy is now rmambiguous on this matter.
Until the arrival of the king, your job is to spy on those who falsely advocate policies of Franco-Vietnamese harmony, Franco-Vietnamese friendship, and direct rule.
Why not?
They are dangerous threats to order and security!
Normally, it is okay, but when the king comes we must take special precautions against those who advocate direct rule.
They don't dare to do anything because everyone already knows that they are criminals.
But the democracy advocates are different.
The government has been tolerant of them up to now, ignoring them and sometimes permitting them to act freely.
We are worried that they may try something.
Democracy is the enemy of monarchism.
Yes, arrest them all!
Good question!
I'll ask the chief…or…on second thought, let's arrest them, too.
Sir, perhaps our policy should be as follows:
anyone who greets the two kings by standing as still and quiet as wooden statues, we leave alone.
Hmm.
That makes a lot of sense.
It will certainly contribute to the maintenance of security.
But enough already.
After the two agents resolved to conceal the secrets that they had already revealed, Red-Haired Xuan could hear nothing more, only the sounds of chopsticks tapping on bowls.
But Xuan had heard enough.
Turning back to his table, he found the fortune-teller so engrossed in eating and drinking that he had ignored the entire conversation.
Xuan looked at the rapidly vanishing food, folded his arms, and stared at the old man.
When the fortune-teller had cleared the table, Xuan stood up.
He was not angry at the fortune-teller's lack of manners because he had come up with a clever scheme to stymie his rival's nefarious plan.
Adopting the scornful expression of the upper classes, he signaled for the fortune-teller to follow him.
At the counter where he was paying his bill, Xuan met Dr. Straight Talk together with two young men in elegant European suits.
The doctor shook his hand merrily.
This is Professor Xuan, a tennis player.
This is Mr. Hai, a very talented tennis player and winner of the Tonkin championship in 1936.
Xuan shook their hands and bowed low.
Dr. Straight Talk said cheerfully.
Given his displeasure at the doctor's restrained introduction, Xuan was thrilled to spot officers Min dO' and Min toa across the room.
That they were without their usual belts, whips, and batons indicated that they were off-duty.
Just as he was about to greet them, the two officers spotted Xuan and raised their hands toward him in a military salute.
Xuan smiled, shook their hands, and turned to introduce them.
Sirs, this is Mr. Min dO', a policeman of the fourth rank and winner of the Victory Medal.
He won first prize in the Tour de Hanoi-Ha Dong and second prize in Tour de Hanoi-D'O SO'n.
He represents the future of the police!…And this is Mr. Min toa, winner of the first prize in the Tour de Hanoi-Hanoi Cup, first prize in the Hanoi-Nam D!nh Cup, the Laundry Boy Cup, and the Melia Jaune Cup.
Everyone shook hands.
Following the introductions, the two offi-cers again saluted Xuan and returned to their table.
Seeing that Xuan was so famous that even the policemen knew him, the Tonkin champions of 1935 and 1936 were extremely wor-ried.
A look of fear crossed their faces.
Xuan, on the other hand, was completely content.
With his counterplot in mind, he made an appointment to meet with the other two players to discuss a private matter.
They were honored, of course, and accepted immediately.
Then Red-Haired Xuan excused himself to speak with Dr. Straight Talk in private.
you are a man of great knowledge and talent.
the doctor replied.
Sir, I beg you to restore the lost chastity of a widow!
The doctor inquired further about Xuan's strange request, and he related the whole story of his secret love affair with Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
The doctor was flattered that Xuan considered him such a close friend, and he promised modestly to do what he could.
Okay, my friend.
Xuan said good-bye and paid the check.
The fortune-teller was nowhere to be seen.
An Antidote for Loose Morals At two o'clock that afternoon the citizens of Hanoi and people of Tonkin gathered on the sidewalks along the streets between the train station and the residence of the governor-general, the route fol-lowed by all important processions.
Imperial soldiers lined the roads in a solemn and orderly fashion.
The rumors, it turns out, were correct.
The king of Siam was undertaking an imperial journey to our country of Nam.
People saw pictures of the Siamese king in the newspapers and marveled at his youth.
The front pages of all the daily papers published huge seven-column headlines announcing the event:
A Historic Turning Point:
referred to the direction traveled by the king of Siam).
Royalist papers were especially effusive:
A Special Honor for the Common People of Vietnam:
Siam and Vietnam:
Only one paper protested by printing the following on the front page:
Accentuate the Positive, Conceal the Negative!
Thus the public turned out in their finest clothes to welcome the kings.
Many men even wore makeup.
…When the big day came, both Miss Snow and Mrs. Civilization wore the outfit as part of an effort to launch the new design among the upper classes of Hanoi.
Red-Haired Xuan stood with the two other athletes at the comer of Hang C Street.
Using the intelligence he had gathered at the restaurant the previous day, Xuan was plotting to undermine his rival's plot against him and to secure additional benefits for himself.
As part of his counterplan, he had persuaded the tennis champions from 1935 and 1936 (both of whom he was afraid of) to dress in a fashion identical to his.
Hence, all three wore white pants, white shoes, sleeveless white shirts, and white caps on their heads.
we must dress differently from the common hordes.
The two gullible champions fell right into Xuan's clever trap!
Little did they know that he was scheming not only to turn the tables on his enemy but to use his enemy's plot against him to do in the other two as well!
The sports festival was scheduled to begin the day after the kings arrived.
As he was clearly a weaker player than the two ex-champions, Xuan knew it would be futile to rely on talent alone.
The royal cars were slow to arrive, and the crowd began to grow uneasy.
Hai and Thl,l stood stoically at attention, posing so as to make the muscles in their arms bulge out.
Like virtuous noblemen, they stared straight ahead, taking no notice of the beautiful girls watching them from across the street.
Pretending that he was bor-rowing their handkerchiefs, Red-Haired Xuan inserted himself be-tween Hai and Th., and slipped his hands into their back pockets.
The two champions smiled condescendingly but did not reply.
Red-Haired Xuan kept an eye on his back.
Finally, he caught a glimpse of his rival's henchman approaching from behind (he was tipped off by the cap, the hair in a bun, and the Chinese shoes).
Xuan folded his arms and feigned ignorance as the henchman fur-tively slipped something into his back pocket and quickly stole away Moving slowly so as not to draw attention to himself, Xuan pulled the sheets of paper from his back pocket, divided them into two stacks, and, without so much as glancing at them, stuffed them into his two friends' back pockets.
Naturally, they thought he was returning their handkerchiefs.
Transfixed by the talking flowers on the other side of the road, Hai and Th,.
neither noticed nor sus-pected anything.
Red-Haired Xuan surveyed the crowd looking for Miss Snow's ex-fiance.
Although they were only five people apart, it was difficult for Xuan to spot him because he was wearing a European suit and a pair of sunglasses!
He obviously planned to do something bad.
The crowd began to buzz with excitement.
The king's car had been spotted, and the hooves of cavalry horses echoed in the dis-tance.
Xuan glanced around and saw his lovelorn rival and the old-fashioned gangster positioning themselves a few steps away from him.
Hai and Th,.
scoffed at Xuan's old-fashioned enthusiasm.
one of them said.
The kings' cars were now only a few steps away.
People in the crowd swayed back and forth, pointing and talking excitedly.
Quick as a water hen, Xuan darted through the crowd in the opposite direction of the procession.
After moving about twenty meters, he stopped and looked back.
tennis champion Hai yelled out suddenly.
The slogan was immediately followed by several others.
Vive la Front Populaire!
To the crowd on the pavement expressions of shock were clearly visible on the faces of the governor-general, the resident superior, the king of our country, and the king of Siam.
After the procession passed, imperial soldiers refused to let the onlookers dissolve into the street.
A phalanx of security agents and secret policemen de-scended on the section of the crowd from where the slogans had rung out.
Following normal procedures, people's pockets were checked for bombs and guns.
In the pockets of the two champions, leaflets denouncing Siamese imperialism were discovered and confiscated.
The two men were ushered into a squad car and driven to police headquarters.
Since every newspaper in Indochina had come out early in the morning on that day, reliable news about the episode was scarce.
Even the General Athletic Department was un-aware that the suspects were actually the two ex-champions who were scheduled to play for the kings the following morning.
The crowd dispersed, and Red-Haired Xuan returned home.
Upon meeting Miss Snow and, he confi-dently assured them that the Indochinese Tennis Championship would soon be his.
Just like a real manager, Mr. Civilization urged him to be cautious.
The king of Siam is also a big sports fan.
It seems that he has brought along his own tennis champion, who is supposed to display his talents to our French and Vietnamese spectators following the national tournament!
You may be confident of victory in the tourna-ment, but you should prepare yourself for the Siamese challenge afterwards.
Xuan replied cryptically.
As they walked, Dr. Straight Talk came running toward them.
he exclaimed.
We are to celebrate the happy fact that little Master Blessing has stopped sneezing.
Dr. Straight Talk asked.
Xuan whispered, grabbing the doctor's hand.
Dr. Straight Talk an-swered, with surprise.
Everyone shook hands, said good-bye, and promised to meet again soon.
It was strange that Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer had not come out to welcome the kings or to watch the crowds.
Xuan, too, was surprised.
When he arrived home, he inquired about her absence with Master Blessing, who sagely responded:
No way!
Satisfied that his student's mental capacity had improved, Xuan went off to look for his mother.
But, when he came upon Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer, she was unresponsive; she just held her face in her hands and cried.
Xuan admonished her.
Please be reasonable!
Who can bear such whining!
To explain her frazzled state of mind, Mrs. Deputy Customs Offi-cer referred Xuan to two recent issues of the Con V~t magazine.
she said.
Read the two short novels serialized in these damned issues, and you will understand.
Red-Haired Xuan read the titles:
The Mistress and Uncle Phac-to's Crime.
They were translated versions of La patronne and Le crime au pere Boniface, both by Guy de Maupassant.
Xuan nonchalantly threw both copies of Con V(?t down on the table.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Offi-cer said.
Stop being silly!
They are translations from the French.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer countered.
It's shameful.
Reluctantly, Xuan sat down and began to read the stories that had allegedly bad-mouthed him.
His interpretation of the stories, how-ever, differed from Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer's.
he reas-sured her.
Not to worry, my dear.
In this life the more honorable you are, the more you are denounced in the press.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer found Xuan's logic persuasive, and she started to calm down.
she said, showering Xuan with kisses.
But Xuan had grown tired of these middle-aged expressions of affection.
He pushed her heavily made-up face away.
he exclaimed.
The faithful widow was furious at this rejection.
You no-good bastard!
You unfaithful wretch!
You have ruined my life, and now you want to get rid of me!
It's not going to be so easy with this woman, I'll tell you that!
replied Xuan, standing up and waving his hand at her dismissively.
You have been very kind!
You have a good heart!
Maybe I have ruined your life.
It is certainly possible!
But I think I have found a way to fix it.
It is true, Madame!
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer screamed.
Forget it!
Xuan admonished her.
You and I, together like that.
It's nothing to joke about.
Forget it!
Red-Haired Xuan solemnly raised his right hand.
If I am joking, let Heaven exterminate my entire extended fam-ily!
I guarantee that Dr. Straight Talk is going to help you.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer screamed.
Not Dr. Straight Talk!
I'm going to die!
The sound of car horns outside the gate put an abrupt end to her tantrum.
She looked at the clock.
It was seven already, and the guests were arriving to celebrate the recovery of little Master Blessing.
With the single exception of Miss Snow, the party was attended by the entire upper crust of Hanoi society as well as several members of the common people who either knew Mrs. Deputy Customs Offi-cer or had business at the Europeanization Tailor Shop.
Little Master Blessing sat in the chair of honor.
After an hour of small talk and eating, Dr. Straight Talk suddenly stood up and addressed the guests.
Ladies and gentlemen…We are all friends here.
I am putting together a short speech about an issue of great social and moral importance that is often misunder-stood.
There was a smattering of applause.
Great!
Red-Haired Xuan cheered.
someone in the room asked.
I wish to talk about middle-aged women!
Why do women over forty often feel an intense desire for love?
Should society make fun of these women?
Should they be mocked or not?
A round of applause followed the doctor's introduction.
(Friends of Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer were certain he was planning to play a trick on her.) A wave of anxiety swept over Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer, and her face turned pale.
Dr. Straight Talk stood up and began reading from a stack of papers.
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.
Tonight, I will try to share with you the little that I know about the'autumn of love'-or, in other words, the growth of lust and desire among those who are getting on in years and allegedly ought to know better.
Our society has adopted a narrow and prejudiced view of this phenomenon, perhaps because science has yet to fully explain it.
For example, if we see a fifty-year-old man hiring a young housekeeper or taking a concubine, we disapprovingly label him a'cradle robber' (applause).
It is even more disgraceful for a fifty-year-old woman to become entangled in a love affair.
In such a case people do not hesitate to curse and mock her with cruel words.
But we must ask ourselves, Are such attacks proper?
Do not old or aging people have the right to enjoy sexual satisfaction?
No!
No, I say!
This is a matter for the Creator to decide, not mere human beings!
In the course of life, there are two typical periods of sexual crisis:
adolescence and the time directly prior to the transition to old age.
Since the Creator has arranged it this way, there are few people who can avoid these periods.
The greater the degree of spiritual crisis that teenagers experience during adolescence, the more confusing will be the autumn of love for'old people who should be content and enjoy life.' When old men take young concubines (applause), they are mocked and ridiculed.
Sometimes older women also get involved in love affairs and flirtatious encounters (applause).
Today I do not plan to pass judgment on these bad things but to explain why they occur.
Dr. Vachet has some interesting comments.
I will quote from his work so as to show that science can illuminate issues hitherto understood through such shallow and meaningless words and phrases as corrupted customs, itchiness, flirtatiousness, cradle robbing…According to Dr. Vachet, during periods of sexual crisis, women often exhibit strange and unexpected symptoms.
The interruption of menstruation coinciding with the shortening of the temper signifies the onset of physical and spiritual changes that in tum may trigger a complex and intractable desire for sex.
Unfortunately for these now easily excitable women, these changes tend to occur after their husbands are old and sexually impotent.
What are they to do?
Since they are old and wrinkled, it is difficult for them to find young paramours who love them deeply (applause).
Moreover, few women dare to reject convention and pub-lic opinion and discard the virtue that they have been cultivating their entire lives…But sex continues to obsess them-to make their faces red and their hearts race.
Alas!
These women try to control themselves even as they are undergoing significant uncontrollable changes:
they are often angry, hot-tempered, crabby, bored with life, or newly jealous about an-cient episodes involving their husbands.
If the husband is still strong, it may be a great boon for him to have such a wife.
But, alas, many times the man does not have the requisite strength.
Sometimes he has his hands full just keeping the family warm and well fed (applause).
There are also many cases in which the husband has passed away and the woman must cope with this period of crisis as a ividovv (applause).
If she does not remarry, it is only natural that she will take lovers (applause).
There are many humorous examples I could cite, but what is important to remember is that they all stem from a single physical condition.
The crisis is virtually unavoidable, but, fortunately, it lasts for only a limited period of time.
Ultimately, the cause lies in the sex organs them-selves:
the fact that the eggs lack blood and the uterus ceases to menstruate.
The crowd roared with approval.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer recovered consciousness the min-ute the doctor stopped speaking.
).
Her flirtatiousness now had a legitimate place in the sacred book of saints and sages.
She was glad, in fact, to know that she had mis-behaved in such a scientific way.
Red-Haired Xuan Saves the Country Red-Haired Xuan:
A Great Man Pity the Father-of-the-Bride Who is not Smacked in the Face A1though even the cheapest tickets cost three piasters, over three thousand spectators showed up that morning to attend the tourna-ment.
Hanoi's Rollande Varreau Tennis Stadium was about to mark a historic turning point in the history of sports.
Rumor had it that many late-arriving tennis fans could not buy tickets and were so outraged that they chose to die in a sporting way-they committed slow suicide by smoking pure opium into their lungs over an ex-tended period.
The hopes of Grandpa H6ng, Mr. Civilization, Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer, Mr. ILL, and many others were dashed early when Mrs. Civilization suffered a devastating defeat in the women's tour-nament.
Miss Snow tried to assuage her father's disappointment by reminding him that a victory by Xuan could still salvage the family honor.
At that moment two Frenchwomen were playing for the French Women's Championship; the supporters from the European-ization Shop barely paid attention.
Seated among high-ranking civil and military officials from all three governments, spectators could see (from left to right):
the governor-general, the resident superior, the king of our country, and S.
M.
Prajadhipok, the king of Siam.
Although he wore a European suit, the king of Siam also wore a traditional crown made of gold and pearls.
It looked like a tower because each of its nine levels became progressively smaller toward the top.
It was supposedly a symbol of the land of a million elephants.
Behind the king was one of his German advisors and one of his Japanese advisors, symbols of Siam's rapid progress toward independence.
Siam's tennis cham-pion, Luang Prabahol, sat next to him, confirming that the king of the land of a thousand elephants was also a sports fan.
The directors of the General Athletic Department of Tonkin were anxious and angry because the final match was only moments away, and still there was no sign of the ex-champions Hai and Th,!
What to do?
The General Athletic Department sent many people to search for the missing champions but to no avail.
Even their families did not know where they were.
The world of sports was in an uproar; people were shocked, surprised, worried, and frightened.
Nobody knew that both men were lying on the bug-infested interrogation room floor of the Security Police Station.
Even the Department of Counterespionage was oblivious to their identity, since all of its agents were tailing the two kings, and there were not enough extra staff members to check the prisoners' identity cards.
The General Athletic Department concluded that they had been duped and be-trayed.
Such behavior was not uncommon among famous athletes.
To salvage the afternoon and appease the spectators, the directors of the General Athletic Department invited the champion of Siam to play against Red-Haired Xuan.
The match was announced over the loudspeaker, and the audi-ence applauded enthusiastically.
After all, Hai, Th,, and Xuan were known quantities, but no one had ever witnessed the talents of Luang Prabahol, the champion of Siam!
The French and Vietnamese spectators were also pleased because they imagined that the General Athletic Department had planned all along for the champion of Siam to play against Xuan, an underdog who had never won a champion-ship.
It was a true slight.
Of course, Xuan's manager, Mr. Civiliza-tion, was thrilled that his client was to represent Hanoi and defend the honor of the Fatherland against the champion of Siam.
The audience cheered and applauded for Xuan.
The king of Siam, on the other hand, made a face more furious than had ever been seen before on the face of a Son of Heaven who rules over a land of one million elephants.
The obvious weakness of his player from Bangkok struck him li.ke a bolt of thunder.
Xuan of Hanoi won the first set 6-1.
The king of our country, the governor-general, and the resident superior began to show signs of concern.
A crushing victory for Indochina in the sports arena might trigger a diplomatic crisis.
Alas!
Everything in this world has its pluses and minuses.
During the second set the crowd watched uneasily as Xuan began to let up on his opponent.
Mr. Civilization grew especially worried when Xuan lost the second set 5-7.
The more sophisticated sports fans, however, assumed that he was saving his energy for the final set.
During the first game of the third set both players competed in-tensely.
Luang Prabahol played as well as he could but was unable to gain the upper hand.
When the referee shouted 15-30, the king of Siam resigned himself to the imminent defeat of his champion.
He immediately pulled from his pocket a map of Indochina redrawn by official Siamese cartographers so that Siam's territory extended past the Hoanh mountain range.
Ignoring the game, he stared intently at the map.
La guerre!
whispered the German and Japa-nese advisors.
Unaware of what was going on, the French and Vietnamese spec-tators continued to cheer wildly for Xuan.
the referee shouted.
The air was thick with foreboding.
Our king, the governor-general, and the resident superior exchanged worried glances.
Fi-nally, the governor-general ordered the director of the Indochinese Political Bureau to go find Red-Haired Xuan's manager.
Naturally, Mr. Civilization was moved that such a high-ranking government official desired to speak with him in private.
They huddled together in an empty corner of the stadium.
the director whispered.
The fate of our county is at stake.
You must ask your client to lose the match against the champion of Siam!
Mr. Civilization was stunned.
the director continued.
It is very important, and time is of the essence!
If Annam defeats Siam in tennis, war will cer-tainly break out!
We must follow the Peace Policy of the French Gov-ernment.
Otherwise, the mountains will be covered with bones, and the rivers will run red with blood.
The crowd cheered noisily.
Ca rang, ca rang ta.
the referee repeated.
Xuan walked over to the ball boy.
Civilization whispered ur-gently to him.
Concede!
The audience looked on anxiously as the score changed from 7-7 to 7-8.
There was still hope for Hanoi, but then the unexpected oc-curred.
Xuan lobbed a return so absurdly high in the air that it sailed out of bounds and knocked into the fence surrounding the court…-9.
The crowd booed in disappointment.
The military band struck up La Marseillaise to congratulate the Siamese champion.
The kings and high officials returned to the governor-general's mansion.
The official procession of flag-bearing cars left the stadium, but a large section of the crowd remained behind to see Xuan.
One small group of angry fans denounced him bitterly.
Another felt sorry for him.
Still another shouted:
Grandpa H6ng, Miss Snow, Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer, and Mrs. Civiliza-tion were extremely disappointed.
Photographers swarmed around Xuan snapping his picture.
Journalists began questioning Xuan's sus-picious play, especially on the final serve.
Did Xuan miss-hit the last ball deliberately?
How could a talented player like Xuan, a tennis professor no less…have brought such shame upon his country?
Denunciations rang out:
He's a national disgrace!
Go back to the cow shed!
A bas Xuan!
A bas Xuan!
shouted several Frenchmen.
The situation began to deteriorate, and Mr. Civilization and Red-Haired Xuan sought a safe haven on the roof of Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer's car.
Following Civilization's advice, Xuan prepared to address the angry crowd, now several thousand strong and growing more aggressive by the minute.
Civilization was struck by the gravity of the situation and rose to speak first.
Xuan did not lose because he lacks talent or ability!
You can all see as much for yourselves.
The weightiness of his own words pleased Civilization immensely.
Following suit, Xuan addressed the crowd in a haughty and imperi-ous voice.
People!
You do not understand the important reason that I conceded the match to the Siamese champion!
Frivolous people!
You do not know the profound sacrifice that I have made (he tapped on his chest).
You do not yet understand that I have renounced personal fame and fortune to secure peace and order for our Motherland!
He pumped his fist into the air!
For many years the French government and the French people have struggled for world peace.
Who knows what will be the out-come of a fight between Vietnam and Siam, but such a conflict will certainly drag the entire world into war!
Therefore, I did not com-pete today so as to win points on a tennis court.
He raised his arm over his head.
He lowered his arms.
Oh, my people!
Although you are angry with me, I still love and esteem you!
Go back to work!
Go back to your comfortable lives!
Enjoy your peace and security!
I do not claim to be some sort of national savior-I have only done what I could to save you from the horrors of war!
Long live peace!
Using the talents he had developed advertising venereal disease medicine and exhibiting the selfless qualities he had learned running errands for a theater (and with the assistance of Mr. Civilization), Red-Haired Xuan had won over the public just like a skillful French politician.
Despite the condescending tone of his remarks, the crowd expressed no resentment toward Xuan.
Rather, they admired his pluck for daring to deliver such a speech!
After he finished, applause echoed like rain in a thunderstorm.
Once again, an army of photogra-phers rushed toward him.
the crowd roared with approval.
With a modest gesture typical of great men, Xuan pumped his fists in the air, leapt to the ground, and got inside the car.
Off it went among a procession of other vehicles, leaving behind several thou-sand onlookers in a state of emotional frenzy.
When Grandpa H6ng's car pulled into the driveway, he was so dismayed to see Grandma casually chopping areca nuts that he for-got to clear his throat and spit.
Didn't the stupid woman know that a historic event had just occurred?
he asked her.
Grandma asked inno-cently.
How about your youngest son-in-law?
Grandpa H6ng replied, pursing his lips.
But there are different ways to lose!
He lost victoriously!
He lost in the most glori-ous way!
Madame, do not scold me anymore!
Your youngest son-in- law is now a great man-a hero.
Grandma fell silent as various family members began returning to the house.
Miss Snow was already putting on airs!
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer flitted around the house like a water bug.
Mr. ILL kneeled down slavishly to change Red-Haired Xuan's shoes.
Dr. Straight Talk congratu-lated Grandma.
Thank you.
Mr. Civilization responded.
Grandpa H6ng crawled into bed and demanded the services of the opium servant.
The meaning and origins of the saying were obscure even to the older generation.
Grandpa had long affected a swelled head so as not to be considered out of fashion.
Maybe it would swell even more if it were smacked.
But who was going to smack him?
He punctuated the question in his mind with three imaginary question marks.
He told himself that only time would tell, closed his eyes, and tried to forget his frustration.
The sound of a car parking and footsteps approaching the house roused him from his sleep.
Everybody looked out the window and saw a uniformed Frenchman enter the house.
He had stripes on his sleeves and wore a sword hanging from a gold belt.
A wave of fear passed through the house.
The Frenchman greeted the guests politely in a kind of Franco-Vietnamese.
Mr. Civilization bowed down to greet him and signaled for Xuan to stand up.
I am an emissary from the governor-general.
Grandpa H6ng called to his servants.
The emissary raised his hand.
Excuse me!
But the decision has yet to be formalized in writing.
It is perhaps too early for the altar.
Please wait a couple of days.
Moreover, I also must inform you that it is not only our government that plans to honor you.
The imperial courts in Hue' and Bangkok each plan to bestow honors upon you that may be distributed among your relatives.
They include the Dragon Award and the Medal of Siamese Virtue.
In addition, the director of the Indochinese Political Bureau wishes to invite you for dinner tonight.
Red-Haired Xuan bowed his head low.
Mr. Civilization also bowed his head.
Please honor the director of the Political Bureau with your pres-ence this evening.
You will be awarded medals for yourselves and your family members.
You should prepare at once, and the French government will inform the Imperial Courts in Hue' and Siam that you plan to accept.
I offer each of you my most heartfelt congratula-tions.
The manager and the talented tennis player escorted the high-ranking emissary to a huge car, displaying a three-colored flag.
The car pulled away, and Xuan and Civilization returned to the house.
They were speechless with joy.
Grandpa H6ng stood up on his bed.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is a day of jubilation.
Everyone clapped with the exception of Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer.
Mr. Civilization shook hands with his father.
he said to him.
Grandpa H6ng embraced and kissed his son.
Thank you very much!
I am deeply honored!
Xuan caught a glimpse of the sulking face of Mrs. Deputy Cus-toms Officer.
The faithful widow had a pathetic lovelorn look about her.
She is a virtuous woman.
She built the tennis court to support sports and has been especially kind to me.
Moreover, she has remained admi-rably faithful to her two ex-husbands.
Xuan asked his new father-in-law.
Everyone clapped their hands and cheered.
Mrs. Deputy Customs Officer was so moved that her face turned red.
She longed intensely to throw her arms around her secret lover and kiss him, but, since she had just been awarded the Medal of Siamese Virtue, she struggled to restrain herself.
It was up to her to set a good example for other women.
Miss Snow was hiding behind a curtain, pretending to be bashful about her upcoming marriage.
Grandma sat at Grandpa's feet, look-ing forlorn.
She regretted that she had scolded her son, criticized her daughter, and bad-mouthed Xuan.
Grandpa lay on his bed, smoking his ninety-sixth pipe of opium and imagining the satisfaction of being smacked in the face.
Before everyone had finished congratulating everyone else, a wave of guests merrily entered the house.
They included Officers Min dO' and Min toa, Victor Ban, the monk Tang Phu from the Lady Banh Pagoda, the old fortune-teller, High School Graduate Tan, the horned senior clerk, and Mrs. ILL.
A series of long-winded congratu-lations echoed through the house.
On behalf of the police, let me convey my warmest regards.
The senior postal clerk whispered a special congratulations to Xuan.
Gradually, the chorus of congratulations became tiresome.
Even Grandpa H6ng grew bored.
What did he need with more hollow praise?
He longed to be smacked in the face so that his head would truly swell up!
But, alas, another distinguished guest arrived!
He wore tradi-tional clothes, and his chest was covered with gold medals…Who was this stranger?
I am a member of the Association of Spiritual and Ethical Develop-ment.
Red-Haired Xuan frowned and stood up.
I am he.
The man put his hands together in greeting.
Xuan responded abruptly.
Your honor, our association offers congratulations to you for receiving the Legion of Honor.
It is a great honor for upper-class intellectuals.
I am here to invite Your Honor to join our association.
Your presence will certainly contribute to the spiritual and ethical development of our nation.
Xuan replied curtly.
although our association has previously stressed nobility, our new policy is more oriented toward the common people.
Xuan was unimpressed.
Thank you very much, Your Honor.
I also head a committee that is editing a new Vietnamese dictionary.
Red-Haired Xuan replied nodding his head.
Thank you very much, Your Honor.
This is a lucky day for intel-lectuals and upper-class members of Vietnamese society.
He bowed respectfully to Xuan, nodded somewhat less respectfully to the others, and exited the front door.
Now it was the fortune-teller's turn.
He was frustrated because he had been waiting for a long time and had yet to get a word in.
Stammering and rubbing his ears, he approached Grandpa H6ng.
Grandpa, on behalf of fortune-tellers, I wish you many blessings and a long life.
May the bride and groom enjoy one hundred years of happiness.
I am a very good fortune-teller.
The predictions that I made about Mr. Xuan five months ago have all come to pass.
He is a talented man with a good heart.
snapped Grandpa H6ng.
Pity the poor fortune-teller.
said Xuan.
But Grandpa was sulking because no one had smacked his face yet.
the fate of your son-in- law is the fate of a hero, of a great man.
He will have power, wealth, a beautiful wife, and many children.
Tired of the fortune-teller's nonstop ranting and disappointed that no one had yet smacked his face, Grandpa was overcome with an urge to smack the fortune-teller.
But, instead, he closed his eyes, coughed in his usual way, grabbed his chest, and moaned:
I know!