I've never been fond of chanting poetry; 
But what else can I do in thraldom? 
These long days I'll spend composing poesy: 
Singing poems may help in the wait for freedom. 
In Glory Street, cruel irony I shame was brought on me 
Deliberately, so as to retard my journey. 
Groundlessly I was accused of the crime of spying, 
And a man's honour, for no reason, was reduced to nothing. 
In jail veteran inmates greet the newcomer; 
High above white clouds are chasing black ones away. 
In the sky both white clouds and black freely have gone their way; 
On earth a free man is to stay a prisoner. 
Having travelled o'er steep mount and deep vale, 
How could I expect in the plain to meet even greater danger? 
In the mountain I suffered no harm when meeting a tiger; 
In the plain I ran into men and was thrown in jail. 
I am a delegate of the Vietnamese people 
On his way to China lo meet an important official. 
Why should a storm break out o'er a serene scenery 
And I be flung into prison by way of hospitality? 
A Loyal man, with my heart torn by no remorse, 
I'm suspected of being a Chinese traitor somehow. 
It has ne'er been easy in life to steer one's course, 
But how difficult it all has become now! 
Every morning the sun, emerging o'er the wall, 
Beams on the gate, but the gate is not yet open. 
Inside the prison lingers a gloomy pall, 
But we know outside the sun has risen. 
Once awake everyone starts louse-hunting. 
At eight the gong sounds for the morning meal. 
Come on, Let's go and our stomachs try to fill: 
After such long misery happier days must be coming. 
In the cells how nice it is to have a doze!
For hours we lie about in deep repose. 
I dream of riding a dragon up to heaven. 
Waking, I find myself still pining in pr ison. 
Two o'clock : the doors open to make the cells airy. 
Everyone lifts his eyes for a look at the heavens. 
O free spirits roaming the sky of liberty! 
Know you, one of your peers is languishing in irons? 
The meal over, the sun sinks below the western horizon. 
From all corners rise folk tune and popular ditty : 
Suddenly this dismal, gloomy Zingsi prison
Is turned into a little music academy. 
For each meal only one bowl of rice reddish brown ; 
No vegetables, no salt, even no broth to wash it down. 
If you get food sent in you may soothe your hunger; 
Failing this, you'll famish and can only cry to Mother! 
Nostalgically a flute wails in the ward. 
Sad grows the tone, mournful the melody. 
Miles away, beyond passes and streams, in infinite melancholy, 
A lonely wite mounts a tower to gaze abroad. 
Opening a hungry mouth like a wicked monster, 
Each night the stocks seize the ankles of the prisoner. 
Their jaws grip the right legs of the wretch; 
Only the left is free to bend and stretch. 
There happen in this world things even stranger: 
People jostle to get their feet in priority bound. 
For once locked, they can look forward to peaceful stumber; 
Otherwise, where could they lie undisturbed on this crowded ground ? 
To while the time away we learn to play chess. 
Horse and foot are engaged in pursuit endless. 
Move with lightning speed either to attack or defend: 
Talent and nimble feet will give you the upper hand. 
Look far ahead and ponder deeply. 
Be resolute: attach and attack incessantly. 
A wrong move and even your two chariots are useless; 
Come the right juncture: a pawn can bring you success. 
The forces on both sides are balanced equally, 
But victory will come only to one player. 
Advance, retreat - do both with unerring strategy: 
Only then can you he called a great commander. 
In jail there is neither flower nor wine. 
What could one do when the night is so exquisite? 
To the window I go and look at the moonshine. 
Through the bars the moon gazes at the poet. 
The water ration is half a basin only: 
You can either wash or make tea, just as you please. 
If you want to clean your face, then go withoui tea. 
Should you be keen on tea, well, you can't wash your phiz. 
Like a round mirror the moon shines in mid-autumn, 
Beaming on the earth her silvery light. 
You who enjoy the festival in your family's bosom, 
Think of those in prison and their sorrowful plight. 
In jail we also celebrate mid-autwnn. 
But moon and wind carry a tinge of sadness. 
Barred from enjoying the autumn moon in freedom, 
My heart wanders after her across the heavens boundless. 
Ordinary folk who gamble are at once arrested. 
But once locked up they can play games to their hearts' content. 
And so jailed gamblers are often heard to lament: 
"Why did we never think of this place blessed?"
The State supplies no food to those jailed for gambling, 
So they may learn to mend their ways all the sooner. 
Each day "affluent" inmates can enjoy copious eating. 
As for the poor, hunger makes their eyes and mouths water. 
Every house is decked with Lantern and flower : 
It's national day, the whole country is filled with delight. 
But just now I'm put in chains for a transfer: 
Contrary winds persist in hampering the eagle's flight. 
Out on the road we grow fully aware of the difficulties. 
One peak hardly climbed, another above us rises. 
But once we've struggled up to the highest pass, 
Ten thousand li at one glance can our eyes encompass. 
To the wood seeking shelter a bird flies, forlorn.
Leisurely a lone cloud floats across the expanse of heaven. 
In yonder mountain hamlet a girl ts grinding corn. 
The grain ground, a hot fire glows red in the oven. 
All day my "two horses" have trotted, tireless. 
When night comes I'm served with "five-spice chicken."
Bed-bugs and cold draughts attack, merciless. 
How welcome, the dawn-announcing song of an oriole golden! 
For each meal only a bowl of rice gruel: 
The hungry stomach moans, wails, and curls. 
Three yuan of rice is not enough to feed a man well 
When wood sells as dear as cinnamon and rice as pearls.  
Today I walked fifty-three kilometres. 
My hat and clothes are soaked through, my shoes in tatters. 
Without a place to sleep, all through the night 
I sit on the edge of the latrine, waiting for light. 
On this side of the bars, the husband. 
Outside stands the wife. 
So close, only inches distant; 
Yet as heaven from earth apart. 
What their mouths cannot let know 
Their eyes try to impart. 
Before a word is said, tears flow: 
Truly their plight rends your heart. 
Both good friends of China, for Zhongqing 
We are both heading. 
But there you are, offered the seat of honour; 
While here I am, down the steps, a prisoner. 
Like you I'm a visiting delegate; 
Why then is the difference in treatment so great? 
Such is life: coldness to some, warmth towards others. 
Forever eastward flow the waters
Without the cold and bleakness of winter 
The warmth and splendour of spring there could never be.
Misfortunes have steeled and tempered me 
And strengthened my resolve even further. 
When I came here the rice was still tender green. 
Now half the autumn harvest has already been brought in. 
Everywhere peasants' faces wear smiles of gladness, 
And the ricefields resound with songs of happiness. 
On the roadside, in the cool shade of a tree opulent, 
Stands a thatch hut calling itself "restaurant". 
The menu consists of cold gruel and white salt: 
Drop in, traveller, and enjoy a restful halt!
Life in the ward calls for quite a bit of housekeeping: 
Wood, rice, oil, salt - everything must be bought and paid for. 
In front of each cell there's a little stove standing;
On it all day boil rice, broth, and more. 
The cocks have crowed just once: the night has not yet passed. 
With a retinue of stars the moon sails o'er the hills yonder. 
On the road for a long journey has set out the traveller, 
His face beaten by gust after gust of icy autumn blast. 
The pale east has turned rosy: nascent day 
The last shadows of the night has swept away. 
A warm breath blows across the immense skies, 
And the wayfarer feels poetic inspiration rise. 
Tungzheng jail can be to Pingma likened: 
Each meal a bowl of gruel, the stomach as good as empty. 
But water and Light we can have aplenty, 
And each day for airing the cells are twice opened. 
Old scrolls and new books complement each other. 
A blanket of paper is indeed better than no cover. 
Do you people in jade-and-brocade beds ever think 
Of those in prison who cannot sleep a wink? 
In the cold autumn night, with neither quilt nor mattress, 
I curl myself up for warmth but cannot close my eyes. 
Moonlight on the banana-palms adds to the chilliness. 
I look through the bars: the Little Bear has lain down in the skies. 
Entwined round my arms and legs is a long dragon : 
I look like a foreign officer with braid on the shoulders. 
But the cords officers wear are of golden thread woven, 
While my decoration is but a thick rope of fibres. 
You were, my friend, hard and unyielding; 
Not like the tongue, soft and stretching. 
The bitter and the sweet we have shared to this day, 
But now each of us must go his own way.  
Vast but alas! barren is the land. 
No wonder the people work hard and are thrifty. 
This spring there has been a bad drought, we understand: 
Of the hoped-for harvest they've brought in a fraction only. 
My arms and legs are tightly bound. 
But in the hills birds sing and flowers blossom. 
Who can prevent my enjoying such sweet scent and sound? 
In my long trudge I may feel a little less lonesome. 
That day, never to come back, you went away, 
Leaving me alone, weighed down with sadness. 
The authorities, in pity of my loneliness, 
Invited me to prison for a temporary stay. 
The State feeds me, I stop at State-owned palaces. 
Guards work in relays to keep me company. 
Passing by mounts and streams I enjoy wonderful scenery. 
It fills a man with pride thinking of such privileges. 
The supple rope has been replaced with hard irons. 
At every step like jade bracelets they jingle. 
Although a prisoner, detained on spying suspicions, 
I have the dignified carriage of a Court official. 
Going with us, guards carry a pig 
On their shoulders, while I'm dragged along rudely. 
A man is treated worse than a pig 
Once deprived of his liberty. 
Of the thousand sources of bitterness and sorrow 
None can be worse than the loss of liberty. 
Even for a word, a gesture, you're no longer free: 
They just haul you along, like a horse or a buffalo. 
It was still pitch-dark when we started. 
The road was uneven, rough and rugged. 
I slipped and landed in a dangerous pit 
But managed to jump out: lucky, wasn't it? 
Carried by the current, the boat sails towards Yongning. 
My legs are tied to the rail, a new style of hanging! 
On both river banks a truly prosperous countryside; 
In midstream light fishing-boats swiftly glide. 
Here's a jail built on the latest model: 
All night the cells are lit up with electric lamps. 
But each meal is nothing more than a bowl of gruel, 
And one's stomach suffers continuous cramps. 
The whole world is ablaze with the flames of war. 
To the battlefield eagerly fighters ask to be sent. 
In jail inaction weighs on the prisoner all the more: 
His noble ambitions are not worth a paltry cent . 
You are only a very ordinary rooster. 
Every morning you crow to announce the day nascent. 
Cock-a-doodle-doo ! You rouse people from slumber. 
Truly, this feat of yours is no mean achievement. 
Nothing but skin and bone remained of him. 
He slept close to my side only last night. 
But misery, cold and hunger were the end of him, 
And this morning gone he was to the world of eternal night.
Ba-i and Shu-ci would not eat the Zhou's rice. 
That man would not swallow the government's gruel. 
Ba-i and Shu-ci died on the Shouiang mountainside; 
The jailed gambler starved to death in his cell. 
Here smoking is strictly prohibited! 
Your tobacco by the warder is quickly confiscated. 
Of course he can smoke his pipe whenever he wants to; 
But just try to have a puff and he'll handcuff you. 
The wind on mountain rocks the edge of its sword sharpens. 
The cold with its spear the tree-boughs pierces. 
The bell from a far-off pagoda the traveller's steps hastens. 
Flute-playing buffalo-boys leisurely ride home to the villages. 
Sixty cents to get a pot of rice cooked. 
A basin of hot water costs no less than one yuan. 
For sixty cents' worth of goods you're charged a full yuan: 
How clearly the prices in prison are fixed! 
The first watch ... the second ... the third dies. 
I toss about, restless: sleep would not come, it seems. 
The fourth watch ... the fifth ... No sooner have I closed my eyes 
Than the five-pointed star haunts my dreams. 
That day you went with me to the edge of the river: 
"When will you be back?" -"When you see the rice ripen." 
But now that the fields have been ploughed for the next season, 
In a foreign land I still remain a prisoner. 
Being in the same boat, how could I refuse to help you?
On your behalf to the authorities I wrote that petition. 
Whereas ... in consequence of ... " -For such newly-learnt jargon 
No end of thanks I got as my due. 
Covered with red and blue as though dressed in brocade; 
Scratching all day long, we seem to be playing the guitar.
Honoured guests, of our rich garbs we make a parade. 
Strange virtuosos, sharing an itch for music we surely are! 
Under the pestle how terribly the rice suffers! 
But it comes out of the pounding as white as cotton. 
The same thing to man in this world occurs: 
Hard trials turn him into polished diamond. 
Formerly when came the Eleventh of November, 
Of the armistice in Europe was observed the anniversary. 
Today bloody fighting rages the five continents over: 
The wicked Nazis for this crime bear the responsibility. 
Now China has been resisting for almost six years. 
Her heroic feats of arms are known all the world over. 
Although victory is just around the corner, 
Even more effort is needed when counter-offensive time appears. 
All over Asia anti-Japanese flags flutter. 
Big flags, little flags - in size they differ. 
Of course the big banners must be present; 
But the little ones can never be absent. 
Enemy planes come roaring in the sky. 
People flee helter-skelter, leaving the place empty. 
Out of prison we are ordered for safety: 
How gladly we all hasten to comply! 
Freed, the prisoner can build the country. 
Misfortunes are tests of a man's loyalty. 
To worry about the common good is a great merit no doubt. 
Let the prison door open and the real dragon will fly out. 
Newcomers to the prison, as a rule, 
Must spend the night near the privy. 
Anyone who wants a sleep peaceful, 
To pay some cash let him be ready! 
The morning sun into the prison penetrates: 
The smoke clears away, the mist dissipates. 
The breath of life suddenly fills the skies, 
And the prisoners' faces are now all smiles. 
Death rather than servitude! Everywhere in my country 
The flags of insurrection again proudly flutter. 
Oh, how sad at such a time to be a prisoner: 
To rush into batlle I wish I could be free!   
The Americans gone, now the Britons are there. 
Their delegation is warmly received everywhere. 
Though I'm also a delegate on a visit friendly, 
Of a peculiar kind is the welcome accorded me!
They transferred me to Nanning; 
Now they are taking me back to Wuming. 
Transfer after complicated transfer: 
My journey they seek to hinder. 
Oh, how bitter! 
At Gode the guards relished fish fresh. 
Now at Baoxiang they savour dog flesh. 
Ah, even that gang of turnkeys 
At times show a taste for delicacies! 
Drenched with rain, flogged by the wind, given a rest never: 
In what wretched conditions you work, road-mender!
Of all who pass -on foot, on horseback, or in a carriage-
How many show any gratitude to you ever? 
All your time with me you've been upright and unbending. 
Hand in hand we've passed many seasons of mist and snow. 
Cursed be the rogue who caused our parting! 
A long, long time will last our sorrow. 
Neither high up nor far away, 
On neither emperor's nor king's throne, 
You're only a little slab of stone 
Standing on the edge of the highway. 
People ask you for guidance; 
You stop them from going astray, 
And tell them the distance 
O'er which they must journey. 
The service you render is no small one  
People will remember what you've done. 
Boohoo! Away ran my conscript Daddy 
He was afraid to serve in the army. 
That's why I'm here in jail with Mummy 
Though I'm half a year old barely. 
For the cost of lighting every newcomer pays: 
Six yuan per person in local currency. 
In this realm of darkness and haze 
Light is worth only that much money. 
A stove for each of the prison folk, 
And earthen pots of every imaginable size, 
For making tea, boiling vegetables, and cooking rice: 
All day the whole place is filled with smoke. 
Like duckweed meeting water, glad we were to see each other. 
How kind and cordial Mr.Guo was to me!
Nothing much : "A little gift of coal in wintry weather." 
Yet, that such people still exist is a blessing truly. 
A generous man, Mr Mo, the Biniang chief-warder! 
He buys rice for the prisoners with his own money; 
At night he takes the fetters off for them to sleep better; 
He never resorts to force, only uses bounty. 
After weeks of trudging along wearily, 
Today we board a train happily. 
Although our seats are but a heap of coal, 
Still it's much better than to resume our stroll! 
Driven by only one thought: liberty, 
Reckless, he jumped off the moving train. 
Alas, after running about half a li, 
He was caught by the guards and a prisoner again. 
The head-warder plays cards every day; 
The police-chief extorts money from transferred prisoners; 
By lamplight the district mandarin busies himself with his papers: 
In Laibin peace is indeed there to stay! 
There must come an end sometime to suffering: 
On the ninth, here I arrive in Liuzhou now. 
As from o'er a hundred days' nightmare I'm awaking, 
A trace of sadness still lingers on my brow. 
A bitter drug tastes all the more bitter when the cup is almost empty. 
The last stage of a hard journey is often the hardest of all. 
To the mandarin's residence the distance is no more than one Ii: 
Why then for so long have I been kept in thrall? 
In sleep an honest look all faces adorn; 
Only when people wake does good or evil show. 
Good and evil are not qualities inborn; 
More often than not from education they flow. 
We had thought this was to be the last gate, 
And the day of deliverance was approaching. 
Alas, there is another pass to negotiate. 
Transfer! Now we are going to Guilin. 
"One day within prison walls seems as long as a thousand years without." 
How right the ancients were, no doubt! 
Four months of a subhuman life, it appears, 
Have aged me even more than ten years. 
Indeed 
For four m.onths I've lived on meagre fare; 
For four months I've never had a sound sleep ; 
For four months I've never changed my wear; 
For four months I've never taken a dip. 
And so 
One of my teeth has fallen away; 
Much of my hair has turned grey; 
Scabies covers my body; 
I'm dark and thin like a demon hungry. 
Fortunately 
Stubborn and persevering, 
I've not yielded an inch. 
Physically I'm suffering, 
But my spirit will ne'er flinch. 
With my health harmed by China's fickle weather, 
And my heart grieved by Viet Nam's long suffering, 
Oh, to fall ill in prison, what a trial hitter! 
Enough to make you weep, but I prefer to sing. 
Neither forest nor cinnamon is found in Guilin; 
Only high mountains and deep rivers are in sight. 
In the shade of a banyan the prison looks terrifying: 
Dark in the daytime, grim and desolate at night. 
Once in jail an entrance fee you'll have to disburse: 
Usually not less than fifty yuan, down to the last cent. 
If you have no money ready in your purse, 
Then at each step you'll meet with endless torment. 
Forty days have gone by in useless sorrow, 
Forty days of truly ineffable suffering. 
And now I'm being sent back to Liuzhou : 
The prospect is really disheartening! 
Liuzhou, Guilin, and now again Liuzhou; 
Kicked back and forth like a soccer ball. 
Innocent, I've been dragged o'er GuangSi, to and from: 
An end to this shuttling can one ever hope to call? 
Hauled o'er thirteen districts of Guangsi; 
Kept in eighteen prisons successively ! 
Tell me, of what crime have you found me guilty? 
That of showing my people unflinching loyalty? 
Each morning the sun emerges from behind the mountain 
And bathes the countryside in a rosy glow. 
But in front of the prison there remains a dark shadow, 
And sunlight cannot yet reach the warder's domain. 
Pure Brightness! Yet a drizzle falls monotonously 
And the prisoners' hearts suffer grievous agony. 
"Which way to freedom," we plead, "pray?" 
To the yamen the guard points, far away. 
A rose blossoms, and then fades. 
It blooms and withers - listless. 
But its scent the cells invades 
And arouses the prisoners' bitterness. 
Without freedom one leads a wretched life truly!
Even on relieving nature restrict ions are imposed. 
When the door is open the bowels are, alas, not ready; 
W1hen one has the gripes, it remains of course closed. 
During the long, sleepless nights in prison, 
I've written a hundred-odd poems on thraldom. 
At the end of each quatrain I put down my brush often 
And through the bars looked up at the sky of freedom. 
Nine days of rain, of sunshine one day: 
Really the sky above has shown no feeling. 
Tattered shoes, muddy road, legs caked in clay! 
Still, tirelessly I must keep slogging. 
On a militant an adverse destiny 1nainlains its hold. 
Eight useless months now have I spent in custody. 
A day is worth a thousand taels of gold: 
When can I ever again hope to be free? 
The Little Beur lies atop the hill, it's ten in the evening . 
Autumn has come, says a cricket's intermiltent chirping. 
But what does the prisoner care about the season ? 
Of only one thing does he dream: liberation. 
Last year when autumn came I was free. 
This year autumn finds me into prison cast. 
With regard to services rendered my country, 
This autumn is, let me say, equal to the last. 
After such long inactivity my legs are soft like cotton. 
Trying a few steps, I stagger and totter.
But very soon bellows the chief-warder: 
"Hey you, come back, no loitering in prison!" 
At the gate guards holding rifles stand. 
Above, shredded clouds with the moon are drifting. 
Bed-bugs swarm about Like tanks manoeuvring. 
Real air squadrons, mosquitoes assemble and disband. 
My heart travels a thousand li to my country. 
Sadness turns my dreams into a thousand tangled skeins. 
An innocent man, yet I've been a whole year in chains. 
With tears dropping on my inkslab, I compose a poem on captivity. 
Of nature the ancients Loved to sing the beauty:  
Moon and flowers, snow and wind, mist, hills and streams. 
But in our days poems should contain verses steely, 
And poets should form assault teams. 
The branches of yon tree draw a portrait of Zhang Fei 
The red sun forever lights the heart of Guan Yu
For a whole year I've received no news from my country; 
O my people, every day I'm waiting for word from you! 